cio-economic stra-
ta. The processes of marketisation of education and the development
of private providers of educational and education support services
(among which private additional and supplementary classes, foreign
language classes and sports and recreation classes have a special
place) contribute to this. Support of this kind is used more by children
from higher socio-economic strata, who already have better school
achievement (Kovač Cerović et al. 2014: 76; OECD, 2011). Lifelong
learning and education of older persons are still underdeveloped and
will become increasingly important with population ageing.
Inequalities in education also exist in other countries and the PISA
survey shows that it is not higher in Serbia compared to OECD coun-
tries (OECD, 2019). However, the importance of inequalities in ed-
ucation is all the greater in view of the declining student population
and the increasingly scarce human resources in society, which are
under additional pressure from internal and external migration. If it
wants to have an educated population that will be more active, pro-
ductive, healthier and politically and socially integrated, Serbia will
have to increase the quality and equity of its education system.
9  Message Seven: With a Declining Number of
Students, the Education System Must Achieve
Greater Quality and Become More Equitable
The education system is a key mechanism for the development of the human resources of a shrinking population. However, the education
system fails to develop the competencies needed for active economic and social life, and in this regard, it achieves more success with
children from higher socio-economic strata than those from the lower ones. Children with developmental difficulties and disabilities are not
sufficiently integrated into the system, and a small percentage of adults and older persons are included in lifelong learning programmes.
25
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
The labour market is an important factor in future demographic change. The current situation not only does not encourage fertility, but
is a strong incentive for migration. Roma, young people and lower-skilled workers, working in the small private sector or in the informal
labour market, have lower incomes and lower levels of labour protection. Other policies, such as education, tax, housing and social
ones, also fail to help them improve their position. In the absence of better living and working conditions, they turn to permanent or
temporary migration.
10 Message Eight: The Labour Market Encourages
Young and Low-Skilled Workers to Migrate
A reduced number of inhabitants also means the reduction in the
number of the working-age people. Developed countries solve this
problem through immigration. However, as population decline is
also expected in underdeveloped countries, labour shortages may
also affect developing countries in a few decades (Reher, 2007:
199-200). The outlines of this process are clearly visible in Eu-
ropean terms. The new European Union member states from
Central Europe have long been a reservoir of labour that supplied
the market of the developed parts of the EU. Economic growth
and labour demand in this region, coupled with decades of mi-
gration, have led to labour shortages that are now sought further
in Eastern and Southeastern Europe. That is why in Serbia there
are more and more occasional and circular migrants working in
Central European countries. In the future, these processes could
lead to a crisis in the Serbian labour market.
Although the working age population is declining, this Human De-
velopment Report demonstrates that Serbia is still not facing a gen-
eral crisis of labour shortage. The reason lies in the fact that there
is still a lot of room for raising labour market participation rates,
especially among Roma, women and older workers. Their greater
involvement, especially in the fo