ght refer
to either Serbian citizens or Serbian-born emigrants, depending on
the available data in destination countries, but it excludes people of
Serbian descent (either territorial or ethnic) who never held Serbian
citizenship and were not born in Serbia. On the other hand, migration
flows refer to the number of Serbian migrants entering or leaving a
given country during a defined period of time.
Additional complications in measurement of migration, especially
changes in emigrant stocks over time, are related to changing status
of Serbia as a polity undergoing four status changes between 1991 and
2006, and is still in an unresolved dispute over its sovereignty of its
autonomous province of Kosovo and Metohija. Further complications
arise from Serbian policy on dual citizenship. As some other countries
with a lot of people of their ethnicity outside its borders, Serbia as a
rule allows dual citizenship. This is used mostly by Serbs from Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Montenegro – and they might reside
either in their countries of origin, in Serbia, or elsewhere as immi-
grants. When people holding dual citizenship emigrate from Serbia,
they might opt to register as immigrants from their countries of origin,
which is particularly the case with Serbs born in Croatia and holding
Croatian citizenship, who enjoy the privileges of the EU citizenship in
their access to work within the EU countries. For that reason, the des-
tination countries’ statistics on emigration of Serbian citizens might
underestimate the true size of emigration of resident nationals. On the
other hand, although it is apparently far less frequent phenomenon,
some Kosovo Albanians take Serbian citizenship in order to travel and
work in the European Union with less restrictions.
There is no easy fix for all these practical problems in capturing em-
igrant stock and migration flows, nor there could be. However, by
53 While annual publication of the Commissariat for Refugees and Migration ‘Migration profile of the Republic of Serbia’ presents such data, they are incomplete and overall
inadequate. The consistent reliance on destination data to assess emigration size and flows was recently adopted by SORS, 2019, Arandarenko and Aleksić 2020, and
Arandarenko, 2021.
54 The data are all taken from the Eurostat database (https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Migration_and_migrant_population_statistics).
combining various sources and pieces of information,  we believe that
it is still possible to get a reasonably accurate idea on the scope and
trends in emigration from and immigration into Serbia.
2.4  Serbian emigrant stocks
during the past decade
In this sub-section we look at the Eurostat data on the total number
of residing Serbian citizens on December 31 each year by countries
of destination. We use two concepts of emigrant stock – Concept 1 is
simply the stock data by country as they are reported. By definition,
Serbian citizens’ immigrant stock in a destination country at the end
of period t is equal to stock in the previous period t-1 increased by the
new mechanical inflows in period t and newly born Serbian citizens
in the destination country, and decreased by the outflows in period
t that include admission into citizenship of the destination country
(naturalization), returns to Serbia, migration to 3rd countries and
deaths.
Concept 2 adds another component to inflows – Serbian citizens nat-
uralized in period t. Note that Concept 2 is not the full stock of Serbi-
an-born immigrants in a destination country, because Serbian-born
emigrants naturalized before the period t remain unaccounted for.
Instead, Concept 2 simply subtracts naturalized Serbian citizens in
period t from the outflow component, realistically assuming that
these people stay in their adopted country. What remains are returns
to Serbia, migration to 3rd countries and deaths. For simplicity, one
can assume that new births, migration to 3rd countries and deaths ar