are decreasing
(Babović, 2021; Stanojević, 2022). On the other hand, women carry a
greater burden of caring for the family and children: women over the
age of 15 spend about four and a half hours on average in unpaid house-
hold chores, while men spend two hours. Among men, younger, more
educated men and those living in urban areas are more involved. Thus,
in the private sphere, traditional patterns and divisions of roles prevail,
although there are more and more women and men who advocate the
ideas of gender equality in the private sphere as well.
European experience shows that greater gender equality, both in
terms of values and in terms of practice, goes hand in hand with higher
fertility rates. Fertility rates are higher in those societies in which atti-
tudes towards gender equality are more widespread. This is true for
all people, but especially for highly educated women (Baizan, Arpino,
Delclòs, 2016: 23-24). Countries with a culture of gender equality also
have higher fertility rates, so women can combine private and busi-
ness life in different ways (i.e., they can choose whether to dedicate
themselves to raising children, return to the labour market, or com-
bine the two roles in different ways) (Brinton & Lee, 2016: 426). This
is how different value orientations are met. Of course, the analysis of
gender attitudes and patterns and public policies largely depends on
the specific context (Sobotka, 2011), so future policies should be ad-
justed to a specific culture, history and institutional setting.
Changing attitudes about gender roles is one of the ways of consol-
idating the demographic development of Serbia. This is the point at
which traditional narratives focused on patriarchal values and high
birth rates are approaching the modernist discourse on gender equal-
ity. If the struggle for gender equality has influenced the change of a
woman’s role in society and lower birth rates, paradoxically, gender
equality today can bring higher fertility rates and greater participa-
tion of women in the labour market (and thus better use of a society’s
human potential).
Although Serbian society highly values the family, children and parenthood, in many aspects it is not family-friendly. Public policies at the
national and local levels are often not tailored to the needs of families and children, while the labour market is insensitive to these issues.
Serbian society perceives itself as a society that values children, fami-
ly and family life, while parenthood is understood through the model
of sacrifice for the benefit of the children. There is also some pressure
to get married and have children early, and these norms are strong-
er in rural than in urban areas, among the less educated rather than
among the more educated inhabitants (Babović, 2021; Tomanović,
Stanojević & Ljubičić, 2016: 47 et seq.).
Contrary to the wishes and collective perceptions, data shows that
the labour market is unfriendly to current and future young parents.
Youth unemployment rates are higher, while the quality of their jobs
is low. The position of women in the labour market is particularly
problematic: women’s activity rates are low compared to those of
men as well as women in developed societies, and the main reason
is the inability to achieve a work-family balance. Many among those
employed perform temporary and occasional jobs with a low level of
labour protection. Women with higher education are in a better posi-
tion than those with secondary and lower education.
The chapter on family support shows that the work and organisation-
al culture is also not parent-friendly, especially when it comes to fa-
thers who have an active role in the upbringing of their children. A
small number of companies offer the possibility of flexible or sliding
working hours, or work from home. By contrast, most parents believe
that such arrangements would help them achieve the work-parenting
balance (Stanojević, 2022)
Preschool institutions are more developed in ur