s
since found different expressions. It notably inspired the 1972 report
“The Limits to Growth,” published by the Club of Rome (Meadows et
al., 1972). This scientific report has had the highest number of pub-
lished copies in history, and used computer simulation methods to put
numbers on the Malthusian claims noted above, with the addition of
oil supplies as a decisive limiting factor as well as the limiting factor
of food supply. In the same tradition, the two influential books “The
Population Bomb” and “The Population Explosion,” both by biologist
Paul Ehrlich (Ehrlich, 1968; Ehrlich and Ehrlich, 1990) have greatly
contributed to raising global political attention with respect to the
potential dangers associated with rapid world population growth. In
recent years, this fear of population growth has been linked to directly
contributing to greenhouse gas emissions, and making it more diffi-
cult to adapt to already unavoidable climate change (IPCC, 2014).
Notwithstanding these concerns about the dangers associated with
rapid population growth, in the field of national politics a growing
population continued to be mostly seen as something desirable.
Changing population size at this level has always been closely linked
to the perceived viability of states and their strength relative to neigh-
bouring populations, exemplified by the traditional Franco-German
struggle for influence and survival. After the French defeat in the
1870-1871 war, divergent demographic trends received much more
attention, where the markedly lower French fertility in the preceding
decades was linked to weakness on the battlefield.
Even people of sharply different philosophical views at the time
agreed on population matters. As expressed by demographer Ar-
3 	For example, also in Hinduism, see Gudorf’s “Comparative Religious Ethics: Everyday Decisions for Our Everyday Lives” as well as various cultures of Sub-Saharan
Africa, see Manuh and Sutherland-Addy’s “Africa in Contemporary Perspective”.
4 	For more information, see Plato’s Laws.
5 	For more information, see Ibn Kaldun’s Al-Muqaddimah (“The Prologue”).
32
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
sène Dumont, “a nation must have a population dense enough to
keep stable an equilibrium with her neighbours” (Dumont, as cited
in Teitelbaum and Winter, 1985). Dumont sought balance to what
he described as the growing unintended consequences of modern
life on reproduction, known as “social capillarity,” or the limiting of
fertility when it was advantageous to climb the social ladders. “From
the moment when the imagination and the attraction of the ideal en-
ter the scene, we find ourselves in the presence of a new principle of
population,” he argued as the trends marched on. Upon surveying
the French census results in 1907, an unnamed German professor is
reported to have said, “more coffins than cradles: this is the begin-
ning of the end... Finis Galliae” (Savant, as cited in Teitelbaum and
Winter, 1985). In the years that followed, these realisations gave birth
to France’s demographic fears and cycles of pro-natalism, a tradition
that carries on in some form to this day and that inspired the thinking
in many countries beyond France.
The causes of contemporary population declines, low fertility rates,
and high out-migration are linked to a high degree of individual agen-
cy and is relatively new in the scope of human history. Rather than
being determined more directly by nature or unavoidable events,
these population declines flow from modern life and the broader pas-
sage of demographic behaviours – fertility, mortality, and migration –
deeper into the sphere of personal control. Demographic behaviours
are still not simply “elective” or independent of outside influence ,
however. A number of competing responsibilities and barriers exist
that discourage people from having the family sizes they reportedly
desire, 2.2 children on 