ecline to the level of approximately
6.5 million. Such an outcome is the result of a combination of high mi-
grations and low fertility and mortality rates.
218
C H A P T E R 9
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Although important, the total size of the population does not give the
entire picture of future demographic trends. Therefore, population
projections need to go beyond the consideration of population size
alone. This is important because human populations are not homo-
geneous and this heterogeneity greatly matters for the future growth
of the population. Populations that have only a small proportion of
women or with more older people are likely to have a lower birth rates
than populations of comparable size, but with a larger proportion of
women in reproductive age. In this sense, future population growth is
a direct function of the age- and sex-structure of the population, and
for this reason it is important that population projections do explicitly
incorporate these two sources of population heterogeneity and define
their assumptions in the form of a specific fertility, mortality and rate
of migrations  for various age categories. The age- and sex-composi-
tion of the population is also of interest in its own right. Population ag-
ing is considered a highly important socio-economic issue, which can
only be quantitatively addressed if the age-structure of populations is
explicitly incorporated in the projection model (KC & Lutz, 2017).
Figures 7.1-7.6 give sex-, age- and education-pyramids as projected
for Serbia under the five scenarios, with the year 2010 as the start-
ing year. Given that most of the assumptions integrated into the SSP
scenarios (with the exception of mortality) mostly affect the younger
population, and the time horizon is only 40 years, the five pyramids
(7.2-7.6) are quite similar to one another regarding the older popu-
lation but differ for the younger population. The population aging is
evident in all scenarios with reverse pyramid trends (narrowing of
the base of the age pyramid) in all cases, with the exception of the
SSP3 scenario. The overall education of the population is expected
to improve in the next four decades, but some scenarios are worse
than others regarding population educational levels. For instance, the
SSP4 (inequality) scenario envisions a considerable share of young
people without formal education.
This section was aimed at pointed to the connectedness between
climate change and demographic movements. While the previous
section showed the reader how climate change is already affecting
the population, this section was supposed to show the possible fu-
tures. Of course, climate models and demographic projections do
not provide an unambiguous answer to the question of what the
future will look like, but they clearly show that climate change sig-
nificantly affects demographic trends, both globally and locally, and
that decision-makers at all levels must take this factor into account
in formulating population policy. In other words, it is necessary to
understand that, in a certain sense, climate policy is at the same time
demographic policy, also; the opposite is true, as if these were two
sides of the same coin. Climate changes adversely affect population
size and structure,  as well as the quality of life. Likewise, population
growth coupled with unsustainable consumer styles has the effect of
increasing climate risks. The most important message of this section
is that population policy must take climate change into account, both
the changes already observed, as well as the future projections.
3.1  Air pollution in Serbia
In addition to climate change, air pollution is one of the biggest en-
vironmental challenges in Serbia. Air pollution is measured by the
concentration of particulate matters (PM). The size of the particles
is directly linked to their potential for causing health problems. Small
particles 