system – pub-
lic or private – would ensure sustaining the relative living standard
more efficiently, given the circumstances in Serbia, in particular in-
vestment opportunities, as well as state capacities to regulate and
oversee the private sector. Finally, the issue of old-age income in-
equality, which tends to be more prevalent in systems with a more
substantial presence of private pensions (Ebbinghaus, 2021), as well
as redistribution towards the more affluent, in view of tax exemp-
tions and subsidies.
Based on the data and research we have today, it seems that in Serbia
it would not be effective to provide consumption smoothing predom-
inantly through private pension schemes, and that major structural
changes would not lead to improved outcomes.
Over the past decade, long -term care (LTC) system reforms in the
EU have been geared towards deinstitutionalisation and stronger
development of community-based services, as well as efforts to di-
rect support, to a greater extent, towards those who need it most
and/or cannot afford it.146 The focus is also on reviewing financing
modalities, from setting up a budget fund for non-institutional
services (Austria), to a dedicated LTC insurance contribution (Ger-
many). Some countries are introducing support for family mem-
bers caring for the old, and ways to ensure a sufficient supply of
high-quality workforce are also sought (European Commission,
2019) (European Commission, 2018). High mortality in care homes
and other consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic in residential
care facilities have crystallised the arguments for deinstitutionali-
sation (Knapp et al., 2021).147
3.1  Outline of the Serbian system
In Serbia, LTC needs are traditionally met within the family. The pub-
lic social protection system provides cash LTC benefit, residential care
and community-based services, while palliative care and home treat-
ment are provided within the health system.148 These segments are
within the mandates of different governance levels and do not com-
prise an integrated system.
The 2019 Population Health Survey shows that, in Serbia, 9.5% of old
people had great difficulties with basic activities of daily living, and
31.5% – with instrumental activities of daily living (RZS i Batut, 2021).
According to SILC (2019) data, 11.4% of the old (65+) perceived severe
long-standing limitations in usual activities due to health problems,
compared to 15.9% in EU-28 (Eurostat, code hlth_silc_12).149 The pro-
portion of women with severe limitations was above the average (12.7
and 17.3%, respectively).
The coverage of older persons by public LTC social protection schemes
does not exceed 7% of the total population aged 65+, assuming no
overlaps in uptake. According to 2020 Ministry data, the proportion of
older people receiving LTC cash benefits, as the most prevalent form
of assistance, is approximately 4.5%.
The total public expenditure on LTC for old persons  in Serbia was as-
sessed in earlier research at only 0.5% of the GDP, with cash benefits
3  Long-term Care
146 Long-term care (LTC) refers to cash benefits, as well as healthcare and social services provided to persons in need of assistance in performing activities of daily living
(ADL) over an extended period of time.
147   Deinstitutionalisation – the transition from institutional to community-based services.
148 Earlier research shows that 59.3% of primary health centres in Serbia do not have a dedicated home treatment unit. In Belgrade, the City Gerontology Institute provides
palliative care to 1500 older people per day (Đukanović & Bogdanović Vasić, 2020:12).
149 This indicator is used in developing LTC expenditure projections in the EU report on ageing (European Commission, 2018:136).
173
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
accounting for the largest proportion (almost three quarters) (Matk-
ović & Stanić, 2014:79). According to OECD data, the average r