and older accounted
for 151 (90%) of all excess deaths. An increase of mortality
among older persons was 76% in comparison to the base-
line mortality. Excess female mortality was over two times
higher than excess male mortality. The biggest increase
in mortality was from diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney
disease, respiratory system diseases, and nervous system
diseases. Cardiovascular and malignant neoplasms mortal-
ity accounted for the highest absolute numbers of excess
deaths (Bogdanović et al., 2013: 140).
2014 Floods
When cyclone Tamara struck, Serbia was unprepared. As
a consequence of heavy rains in May 2014 (nearly 50% of
the May 1950–2013 climatological precipitation fell in only
48 hours) there was a significant increase in water levels in
a short period of time on many rivers (especially the Sava,
Tamnava, Kolubara). The catastrophic floods hit 38 towns
and municipalities in central and western Serbia and around
20% of the population, while over 30,000 people were dis-
placed (among whom almost 25,000 from Obrenovac). The
floods resulted in 51 fatalities, of which 23 from drowning.
The economic damage was estimated at €1.7 billion, caus-
ing economic recession (Đokić & Grujuć, 2015; Crnčević &
Orlović Lovren, 2017; Stadtherr et al., 2016). The May 2014
flood showed the significant unpreparedness of Serbia for
the extreme weather events. It revealed all the consequenc-
es of three decades of poor maintenance, outdated planning
and information system, inefficient implementation and un-
sustainable management, lack of technology and infrastruc-
ture (Trgovčević et a., 2020). This event also exposed the
alarming levels of gender inequalities and pronounced cli-
mate vulnerability of women in Serbia. During the imminent
danger, men (especially older men who had completed their
National Service) were at an advantage because they owned
boats and possessed basic knowledge of rescue procedures.
Consequently, single women and single mothers were at
greater risk than those with male household members and
much more dependent on both organized assistance and
informal support (Baćanović, 2014: 29-30).
with a prolonged drought. The extremely dry and hot conditions led
to wildfires, which damaged crops and caused many casualties. The
wildfires also induced extreme levels of air pollution in cities such as
Moscow, adding to the total number of deaths caused by the heat-
wave (Zscheischler et al., 2018). Similarly, last year in the midst of the
covid-19 pandemic, Northern Macedonia had to face the huge prob-
lems in the energy system as a result first of extreme flooding and
then droughts (BGEN, 2020). The probability of such events in Serbia
is high, and mitigation and adaptation policies should take into ac-
count potentially devastating effects of compound negative climatic
events on the socio-economic functioning of the society.
Climate change is also one of the triggers of migrations. In Serbia,
migrations from rural to urban areas are resulting in unfavourable
social structure both in urban and rural areas. Unfavourable existing
age and gender structure of the remaining population, together with
negative demographic growth represents a threat to rural develop-
ment and makes climate change adaptation more difficult (Igić et al.,
2020: 2). Changes in the ability to perform agricultural work and re-
duced agricultural yields (and thus household income) as a result of
droughts, fires or reduced rainfall due to climate change, can be one
of the drivers of migration from rural to urban areas and thus contrib-
ute to depopulation of these areas.
However, the opposite trend of migration from urban to rural areas
could also be expected in the future, as the ecological migrations of
middle classes are becoming more frequent. In addition to proactive
strategies, such as participation in environmental actions, one of the
strategies of the wealthier and more educated part of the population
in the future might be migration in areas that ar