sfaction. Between these two poles there
is a whole range of combinations of expectations and practices which
can lead to a specific balance or create tension and conflict.
Everyday chores in the household and around children (cleaning, ti-
dying up, cooking, ironing, etc.) are repetitive and as such they rep-
resent an expression of satisfaction to a small degree. Most people
would leave them to someone else or, if they have the funds, they
would hire someone to do them. Still, most of these tasks are done by
women. There are two possible explanations in the domestic context.
The first is based on the idea that there is an unequal amount of pow-
er which depends on the individuals’ resources (such as income, real
estate, education, etc.) (Brines, 1993: 307), so whoever has more pow-
er will be able to transfer these tasks to the spouse who has fewer of
them. The second explanation starts from the fact that regardless of
the amount of resources, men always have power, because it is guar-
anteed to them by the dominant, patriarchal culture.
Significant gender asymmetry is evident in the division of domestic
work in Serbia, because most household maintenance work is per-
formed by women (Chart 5). Among men, there are few who predomi-
nantly perform some of the household tasks, and more than two thirds
of them never perform those tasks which are traditionally related to
the domain of women. Younger, educated men living in urban areas
are more willing to be involved in housekeeping (Stanojević, 2018).
The time budget provides us with more precise data — women older
than 15 spend on average about four and a half hours in unpaid do-
mestic work, while men spend two hours. Women spend most of their
time preparing food, cleaning the household, caring for children and
other members of the household, while men work around the house
and go grocery shopping. Not only are women more engaged on av-
3  Balancing Work and Parenthood – Private
Domain
Chart 5. Division of household tasks
Source: ISI FF 2012, author’s calculations
Wife
Husband
Together
Someone else
Cooking
Washing dishes and clothes
Cleaning
Ironing
53
4
12
30
52
52
4
13
30
50
4
17
29
4
12
31
87
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
erage, but 90% of women are involved in household activities, while
this is the case with 70% of men (SORS, 2015). Although men on av-
erage spend more time at work, this difference still does not level the
overall work by sex, but reflects in the uneven ability to use free time.
Men have an average of seven hours of free time, and women a little
less than six. From these charts, it is clear that men who are fathers
participate significantly less in responsibilities around children and in
overall domestic work. Among fathers with preschool children, 39%
do not take care of children during the day at all, while this is the case
with every tenth mother (11%) (SORS, 2015)..
Analyses show that the resources that women possess are not significant-
ly related to the degree of their engagement in household duties. This
means that women, regardless of their level of education, employment
or income, do domestic work to the same extent. This indicates that val-
ue patterns and the patriarchal matrix primarily shape gender roles, and
that women’s resources, although necessary, are not a sufficient condi-
tion for achieving equality in the private sphere (Babović, 2009).
The situation is similar when it comes to everyday parenting respon-
sibilities (Chart 6). Women are significantly more often involved in
activities which include preparing food and maintaining hygiene and
tidiness of the space in which the child lives. Almost all mothers of
children under the age of five state that they were involved in these
activities in the previous three days, while only one in five fathers was
involved in at least one (Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia
and UNICEF, 2020). These data