tility rates to replacement
levels, purely through cash incentives, is prohibitively expensive.
More fundamentally, what is the goal of fertility policies? Technically,
replacement fertility is defined as the level of fertility by which one
46
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
generation of women is fully replaced by another. In practical terms
this is often approximated by a TFR of 2.1 (which is slightly above two
per woman, to adjust for child mortality and the sex ratio at birth). In
high mortality settings a replacement fertility rate TFR can even be
as high as 2.4-2.5, and in very low mortality settings it can be as low as
below 2.1. But replacement level fertility does not necessarily mean
that the population size is constant in the longer run. This is only the
case when the effect of the starting age structure (the momentum of
population growth) has disappeared and there is no migration and no
further changes in mortality or life expectancy. Since no real popula-
tion has these features, replacement fertility is really a very abstract
concept in the context of stationary population theory – one that has
escaped the lab of technical demographers and influenced the think-
ing of many people who do not really understand the implications or
relying on these measurements which are ill-suited for the features
of the real world.
Discussion of fertility indicators –
which is best to rely on?
Different fertility indicators can tell very different stories. When try-
ing to assess the question as to whether fertility levels should be seen
as too low and whether certain policy measures actually influence
fertility trends, it is of great importance which indicator is being used.
Up until the 1980s the most frequently used indicator was also the
most easily available – CBR, which simply states the number of births
in a given country divided by the total population of that country. But
this indicator is unsatisfactory for several reasons, mostly because
it is greatly dependent on the age structure of a specific population.
In a country with a high proportion of women in reproductive age,
the CBR can be higher than in another country with fewer women in
that age group, even though the number of children per woman might
actually be higher in the latter. This fact greatly limits the compara-
bility of CBRs across countries and over time. To avoid this problem,
the TFR indicator instead uses the sum of all the age-specific fertility
rates observed in one country in a given calendar year, thus eliminat-
ing the misleading effect of differing age structures across countries
and over time.
The TFR is the currently most frequently used indicator and can be
interpreted as the mean number of children a cohort of women would
have if, at a given age, they experience the age-specific fertility rates
observed in this calendar year. This hypothetical cohort of women is
sometimes also called a synthetic cohort because in reality, no group
of women actually pursues such a set of constant fertility rates. But
more recent research has shown that TFR has another problem, in
that it is very sensitive to distortions caused by the changing timing of
fertility (called the “tempo effect”). Specifically, even minor changes
in the mean childbearing age of have significant impacts on the TFR
– for example, if 10% of women decide to postpone their births a year
into the future, the TFR for the current year will be 10% lower, even
if women have the same number of children by age 45. Meanwhile,
the mean childbearing age would only increase by a tenth of a year.
The impact of these timing, or “tempo,” distortions on the TFR indi-
cator is illustrated in the case of another Eastern European country,
the Czech Republic in Figure 6 above. While the TFR was rather sta-
ble, at a comparably high level, until the country’s transformation in
1990, it entered a precipitous decline, falling