 in part explained
by the hydraulic mechanism of labour migrations. Workers move
from Central and Eastern European NMS to OMS in Western Europe;
then their place is filled by third country nationals – from Ukraine, the
Western Balkans, and further afield.
These movements within the EU can also help explain the growing di-
vide between the nature of Serbian emigration into OMS (except Ger-
many) and NMS. OMS experience slower growth and their expansion
and replacement demands are mostly met by the immigrants from
NMS because they face no restrictions in access to jobs. This does not
mean that the doors are closed for new immigration of Serbian work-
ers into OMS; but this is largely possible due to long-standing Serbi-
an diaspora and thus Serbian migrants increasingly use family visa
channels rather than work visas. Austria, the second most important
destination for Serbian migrants among OMS, is a paradigmatic ex-
ample – the total number of first-time visas issued declined from 5,288
in 2015 to 3,764 in 2019, with the share of family visas in total fist-time
visas growing from 55% to 61% over the same period.
Remittances are complex phenomena often difficult to demarcate
from other sources of private income. In international statistics,
workers’ remittance is defined as transfer made by migrants em-
ployed and resident in the compiling economy to their relatives in
their country of origin. Workers’ remittances include household to
household transfers in cash and in kind. This narrow definition is in
everyday but also in expert use in Serbia often confused with broader
statistical concepts of personal and total remittances.56
Remittances are especially important for low-income countries and
on average account for nearly 4 percent of their GDP, compared with
about 1.5 percent of GDP for middle-income countries. However, as
presented in Graph 1 below, the remittance inflow expressed as a per-
centage of GDP in Serbia, which is an upper-middle-income country,
was over 8% on average during the last decade.
Unlike, for example, FDI inflow, which oscillated within the wide cor-
ridor between some 2.5% and 8% of GDP, remittance inflows showed
remarkable stability during the past decade (graph 1). Even in the
pandemic 2020, a steady and strong stream of remittances contin-
ued, showing strong resilience amid the unprecedented global obsta-
cles to movement of people. The share of total remittances in GDP
flowing into Serbia is more than five times the average for middle-in-
come countries. On the other hand, the share of Serbian-born popula-
tion living outside the borders of Serbia is somewhere between three
and four times above the world average of 3.5%.
5  Remittance-Intensive Emigration
110
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Putting the share of emigrant population in resident population in re-
lation to the share of remittances in GDP can be interpreted intuitively
as a share of local population that needs to be ‘sent’ abroad to get re-
mittance inflow of 1% of GDP. We can call this compound expression
the ‘remittance intensity ratio’. The lower the ratio, the more efficient
is migrant population in ‘producing’ remittances. Some of the factors
influencing the remittance intensity ratio are: age structure of emi-
grants; their employment rate; employment-weighted earnings differ-
entials between the destination countries and sending country; share
of the resident population receiving other components of total remit-
tances such as personal income transfers and pensions, for example
telemigrants and retirees. This all points in the same direction - the
largest the share of work migrants (of the NELM type) and non-mi-
grants receiving work-related total remittances is the more favourable.
The remittance intensity ratio for Serbia is below 2 and it is the most
favourable among the Western Balkan countries and among the most
favourable globally. This