eeply rooted within cultures and typically take
longer to correspondingly adjust to any improvements in mortality.
Only after (i) birth rates fall below the so-called “replacement level”
of two surviving children per woman and (ii) a period of time passes
when a young age structure results in an increase of women entering
reproductive age (with a slowing of growth momentum over time)
33
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
does population growth then eventually come to a halt. The precise
timing of this process varies from one population to another also de-
pending on trends in mortality.
While in a few cases, such as historical France, the mortality and fer-
tility declines happened only gradually and at about the same time,
in most countries there was a distinct lag time of several decades be-
tween the two. In terms of what is generally agreed upon, the frame-
work of the three basic preconditions for a lasting fertility decline is
widely accepted (Coale, 1973):
1.	 Fertility must be within the calculus of conscious choice (at the lev-
el of women or couples), meaning it must move from the realm of
fatalism to that of consciously planned behaviour;
2.	Lower fertility must be advantageous; and
3.	 There must be culturally acceptable means for preventing births.
This framework effectively presents the idea that there is no single
causation of fertility decline. Rather, the cognitive (education-relat-
ed), economic (also urbanisation-related), and contraception-relat-
ed factors all need to come together. These pre-conditions were re-
quired in historical Europe to precipitate fertility decline in the same
way as they are still required in today’s African countries seeking to
moderate fertility and speed their process of demographic transition,
and economic development.
Mortality rates have shown continuous improvements for the most
part, but there have also been some notable discontinuities, such as
the AIDS pandemic leading to significant falls in life expectancy in
some African countries, or the deterioration of mortality conditions
mostly among low educated men in some parts of the former Soviet
Union. But in its generalised form, the process of the demographic
transition is considered to be universal in modern history, and essen-
tially irreversible.
At the moment, various populations around the world are at very
different stages of this universal process of demographic transition.
While the process was completed in Europe decades ago, it is now
also complete in most countries in Asia and the Americas, but still
underway in large parts of Africa, where most countries are still in the
phase associated with rapid population growth. The striking contrast
in demographic patterns currently observed in various parts of the
world is essentially a consequence of different populations being at
different stages of this universal process.
The concept of demographic transition was originally triggered by
the observation of declining birth rates in many European countries
over the first few decades of the 20th century. Demographers War-
ren Thompson (1929), Adolphe Landry (1934), and Frank Notestein
(1945) were the first to classify countries into different stages of this
universal process that brings countries from a condition of high birth
and death rates to one that is ultimately characterised by low birth and
death rates. In this early literature, the driver of this process was sim-
ply called “modernisation” without a deeper specification in terms of
the relevant causal mechanisms propelling these changes. But what
they likely had in mind was general socioeconomic development as
the reason for a decline in crude death rates (“CDR”) that was typical-
ly followed by a decline in crude birth rates (“CBR”) after a time-lag of
varying length. As a consequence of the difference between the two,
the rate of natural increase (“RNI”) of a population would r