ting higher birth numbers need
to be coupled with policies aimed at reducing the prominent gaps in
net migration between districts if any improvement in demographic
indicators is expected in most areas of the country. Finally, this chap-
ter suggests that the holistic strategy of addressing the demograph-
ic change implications in Serbia needs to include not only drivers of
low fertility and unfavourable migration patterns, but also all three
dimensions of the human capital index. From that point of view, de-
population or ageing itself may no longer be considered a major de-
mographic challenge in most districts of the country.
C H A P T E R 3
Dragan Stanojević
Addressing the Depopulation
Challenge from the Family Life
Perspective – Is Fertility
Rise Possible?
74
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Is fertility rise possible? If so, under what conditions? The history of
European societies in the last 50 years indicates that after the decline
in fertility, an increase was recorded in some societies.27 At the same
time, it was noted that there are significant differences in fertility
rates between countries. Rates are lower in countries where fami-
ly values are present (where high value is placed on family life and
children) and higher in individualistic cultures.  Demographers and
sociologists have sought to discover the causes of this phenomenon.
In short, higher fertility is associated with a higher quality of life, i.e.
quality of work, quality of marriage (or partnership), and quality of
institutional support for parenthood. Thus, research into the causes
of increased fertility in itself implies research into the labour market,
married life, structure and scope and institutional support, that is, the
possibility of establishing a balance between different spheres of life
and interests.
In this chapter, we will analyse the factors which we assume are as-
sociated with the decision to have children. We will try to answer the
question of what it takes for individuals and couples in Serbia to have
the desired number of children, that is, which factors influence the
decision to have the first, and, especially, every subsequent child. The
deterministic set that leads to the decision to give birth is complex
Numerous studies show that the decision to have children is in-
fluenced by factors related to work and employment, institutional
support for parents, internal marital dynamics and gender roles per-
ceptions (Chart 1). Although there is no absolute consensus on these
and depends on structural and cultural assumptions, partner dynam-
ics, lifestages of individuals and partners, their health conditions, and
more. In the analysis, we will use the theoretical framework which
provides a different focus on this topic than those that have dom-
inated the domestic literature the work-family balance. Although it
uses demographic indicators28, this chapter is primarily written from
a sociological perspective, with the aim of looking at the needs of the
family within the domestic context, and presenting the widest possi-
ble range of measures that can meet personal and family needs and
potentially affect an increase in fertility.
The chapter itself has certain limitations. First, due to insufficient do-
mestic research and analysis on this topic, in most analyses, we relied
on theoretical assumptions and the analyses from the research of oth-
er societies (and Europe as a whole) on this topic. We tried to always
use those sources that, according to our expert opinion, have grounds
to be a framework for explaining behaviour in Serbia as well. Second,
policy measures in the domestic context have not been sufficiently re-
searched, nor have their effects been evaluated, so unfortunately the
consequences of their introduction and changes are not sufficiently
known. Therefore, they are listed in this chapter and evaluated on the
basis of our expert opinion, 