 scenarios
and compared to WEM 2030 (Cavalhiero, 2021: 8). Additional meas-
ures (WAM A, WAM B, WAM C) to reduce emissions could save up
to 3 billion euros in health care costs until 2030. This can be seen
from the graph in Figure 10, which shows the avoided health damage
(= benefits), compared to the basic WEM 2030 scenario. The low-
er estimated benefit for this scenario, which relies on the mortality
rate according to VOLY238, is € 800 million (Šuht, 2021). On the other
hand, VSL239 methodology estimates the negative health impact of
air pollution at 15,6 billion euros (4.6 billion euros VOLY) for REF
2015 year, compared to the most optimistic scenario WEM C – 8.6 bil-
lion euros VSL (value of statistical life) (2.3 billion euros VOLY) annu-
ally (see figure 11). What is indicative is that with the implementation
of measures envisioned by the existing legislation (REF 2015 - WEM)
alone, somewhere between 1.5 billion (VOLY) and 4 billion euros
(VSL) of health costs could be saved. However, it should be taken
into consideration that different scenarios demand different levels
of investment. For example, it is estimated that the implementation
of WAM A will cost around 1 billion euros, while WAM B and WAM C
will cost 2.8 and 2.9 billion euros respectively.240
238 VOLY stands for value of a life year
239 VSL stands for value of statistical life
240 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1uf1aNcO4uayRqEKagZtEe6nPXmp6aFyY/view (Accessed 14/11/21)
223
C H A P T E R 9
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
To conclude, the presented data show that every year a population
of the size of a smaller town disappears in Serbia as a result of air
pollution with the health cost that amounts up to 15.6 billion euros
annually. This puts Serbia at the very top of the list of the European
countries with regards to air pollution. The largest part of the air pol-
lution is attributable to the state-owned thermal power plants and
district heating plants, which means that the improvements in this
sector largely depend on the willingness of the government to tack-
le this issue. It also should be noted that most of the European laws
regarding air protection are transposed into domestic legislation and
that their implementation would save 2,400 lives every year as well
as up to 4 billion euros (in healthcare costs) annually. Therefore, the
first step would be to implement the existing laws.
The general recommendation is that climate change and environ-
mental degradation should be taken as an important factor of (future)
depopulation in Serbia - either through a direct impact on the quali-
ty of life, mortality, birth rates and migration, or indirectly through
economic decline and a loss of vitally important natural resources.
Therefore, improvements in terms of mitigation and adaptation to
climate change and reduction of pollution should have multiple pos-
itive effects on all three aspects of population change: fertility, mor-
tality and migration.
The implementation of existing measures in line with European en-
vironmental legislation would bring significant progress in reducing
morbidity and mortality due to air pollution and climate change. For
example, the new Law on Climate Change241 adequately regulates
this area, however it is necessary to develop bylaws and to work on
their implementation. Bylaws should be developed having in mind
the adverse effects of climate change on the population and human
development, as well as the need to promptly act on reversing ob-
served trends.
Reducing the levels of air pollution in accordance with the WAM sce-
narios is complex and involves significant technological advances,
policy measures and their implementation, as well as campaigns to
raise public awareness. However, it is clear that implementing strict-
er regulations would significantly reduce the number of premature
deaths and improve the overall public health. Controlling the air pol-
luti