-communicable diseases such as hyperten-
sion and diabetes would be significantly reduced. It is widely recog-
nized that a supportive environment may be needed to promote and
achieve an enduring increase in activity at the population level. This
is particularly the case with cycling which is rare and requires the pro-
vision of cycling infrastructure.
We need to pay particular attention to the lifestyles and habits of
young people who represent a special population group that mostly
contributes to the rate of fertility and population growth. The results
of a 2021 survey on the position and needs of young people show that
only 14% are physically active and the majority (85%) would like to
be more physically active. Bearing in mind the most common reasons
given by young people as the cause of their inactivity (fatigue, lack of
time, lack of company for exercise, lack of exercise space), it is nec-
essary to devise a strategy that supports building an environment for
physical activity so that exercise infrastructure is easily accessible to
all, especially on an open space, and that the contents are promoted
through modern communication channels (MoS, 2020).
Tobacco use is associated with an increased risk of illness and death from
respiratory diseases, heart and blood vessel diseases, numerous malig-
nant and other diseases (WHO, 2008a). In Serbia, the use of tobacco has
been one of the most common health risk factors for many years. This is
confirmed by the results of the 2019 and 2013 Population Health Surveys.
In 2019, the prevalence of habits of smoking tobacco products (daily
or occasional) in the population of 15 and over was 31.9% (Milić et al.,
2021). This prevalence is somewhat lower than in 2013 when it was
34.7% but still very high and requires additional efforts to reduce it
(Grozdanov et al., 2014). As regards the young, 24,5% are active smok-
ers (MoS, 2020). This is particularly important because smoking affects
reproductive potential and may significantly reduce the ability for con-
ception (Kovac et al., 2015; Levine et al., 2017). Surveys clearly indi-
cate that the infertility rates among smokers are double than among
non-smokers (American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2022).
One step to reduce this habit in the population would be to imple-
ment evidence-based tobacco control measures, in accordance with
the World Health Organization’s Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control (WHO, 2008b). In recent years, new tobacco and nicotine
products have appeared on the market and their popularity is grow-
ing. Heated tobacco products and electronic cigarettes represent
a new challenge in global efforts to protect the population from the
effects of tobacco use and exposure to tobacco smoke. In 2019, elec-
tronic cigarettes or similar electronic devices (daily or occasionally)
were used by 3.3% of the population.
With the ratification of the World Health Organization’s Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control in 2007, the Republic of Serbia, togeth-
er with 139 other countries, committed herself to comprehensive action
to control tobacco and adopted the Tobacco Control Strategy (2007).
The state has, thereby, set tobacco control as a priority. A step forward
was made in 2010, when the Law on the Protection of the Population
from Exposure to Tobacco Smoke was passed. This Law regulates meas-
ures restricting the use of tobacco products in order to protect the pop-
ulation from exposure to tobacco smoke, control the smoking ban and
supervise the implementation of this Law (Law on the Protection of the
Population from Exposure to Tobacco Smoke, 2010). Various anti-smok-
ing campaigns were conducted prior to and after the Law was enacted,
but the prevalence of smoking is still very high. The results of the 2019
health survey indicate that the legislation and its implementation need
to be improved in line with the WHO Framework Convention on Tobac-
co Control (2003) by a total ban on smoking in all workplaces and public
p