om the end of the pandemic to 2100 would be between 0.99 years
per decade in the northern districts of the Vojvodina region and east-
ern parts of the region of East and Southeast Serbia up to 1.06 years
per decade in the region of Belgrade, in most districts in the region of
Šumadija and West Serbia, and in the central district in the region of
East and Southeast Serbia (Niš).
In the case of men, an increase in e0 by the end of the projection pe-
riod would be between 1.22 years per decade in most districts of the
region of Vojvodina (excluding the district whose centre is Novi Sad)
and eastern parts of the region of East and Southeast Serbia up to 1.37
years per decade in most of the region of Šumadija and West Serbia,
in the region of Belgrade, and in the central district of the region of
South and East Serbia (Niš).
2.1.3	 Baseline migration assumption
Assumption on international migration covers two different patterns
during the projection horizon. The first one assumes the continuation
of trend in net out-migration from Serbia in the next 15 years (2020-
2035) due to the rising high demand for labour force from this region
in the EU labour market and slow advance in the living standard of
Serbian citizens. The gradual transformation of the country’s net
emigration profile to the net immigration one is assumed afterwards,
which is in accordance with expected change based on recent empir-
ical evidence and the migration cycle concept as suggested by Fass-
mann and Reeger (2012).
Despite the known issue of underestimation of the number of Serbian
citizens abroad by the population census, it is the only source of data
that allows analysis of previous trends in international migration at
the district level in Serbia. We used the distribution of emigrants by
district of origin according to the 1991-2011 census results as a start-
ing point for the estimate of current unknown distribution of emi-
grants. We assumed that the share of the oldest emigration zone in
Eastern Serbia in the current total negative migration balance of the
country has decreased by 25-30% depending on the district. This took
place not only due to the increasing share of other non-traditional ar-
eas of emigration in the southwest and the southeast of the country
(Penev & Predojević-Despić, 2012) and new emigration waves from
major city centres across the country, but also because of the reduced
demographic potential of this zone (Nikitović et al., 2015).
From the perspective of the projection horizon in this chapter (2020-
2100), the stages of migration transition, according to the migration
67
C H A P T E R 2
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
cycle model by Fassmann and Reeger (2012), have been interpreted
in relation to the symbolic turning point in the transition process in
Serbia (2030-35). Afterwards, a transition phase should follow during
which immigration gradually outweighs emigration, which coincides
with the migration assumption in the current EUROPOP 2019 projec-
tions (2019-2100) for EU Member States (Eurostat, 2021b). However,
in the period up to 2030-35, the hypothesis was formulated by analogy
with recent evidence on emigration from most states of the Eastern
enlargement and Croatia immediately after their joining to the EU
(Draženović et al. 2018). In addition, the current relaxation of immi-
gration policies towards Serbia by the major destination countries,
such as Germany, indicates that increased emigration is also possible
in the immediate pre-accession period. In other words, the hypothe-
sis of net emigration in the next 10-15 years could be hardly avoided
even in a scenario of Serbia’s ‘non-EU’ future. That would be valid as
long as there is a marked gap in living standard between Serbia and
the most popular European destinations, and the growing demand
for labour in these countries due to the intensification of population
ageing.
Given the above reasoning, as 