retation of the “push and pull” migration theory
(Fassmann & Reeger, 2012), has been used to develop the long-term
hypothesis of international migration, while the assumption of inter-
nal migration has been grounded in the analysis of the urbanisation
process in Serbia (see Antonić, 2021).
2.1.1	 Baseline fertility assumption
Fertility assumption in the baseline scenario has been resulted from
the application of the UN model. Recent research based on the Hu-
man Development Index suggests that a well-known negative correla-
tion between economic development and fertility, typical of the entire
twentieth century, may be reversed. This means that the econom-
ic progress can lead to higher birth rates in the richest societies and
thus become a development guideline for all other low fertility pop-
ulations societies (Myrskylä, Kohler & Billari, 2009; Luci-Greulich &
Thévenon, 2014). It seems that the mechanism of the UN model could
be interpreted in that way as it allows each country to reach the target
total fertility rate that is based on both its own and the experience of
other low-fertility countries that have experienced fertility recovery.
Consequently, the model would result in target TFR of 1.53 by 2050
and 1.67 by 2100 in Southern Europe region (United Nations, 2019b).
As the current UN model recognises only the territory of Serbia in-
cluding the region of Kosovo and Metohija, it was necessary to model
TFR for the territory of Serbia without data for this region. The mod-
el was adjusted to lower territorial levels (regions and districts) in
accordance with the available historic data sets. For each district, a
median of the prediction interval resulting from the UN model was
taken as the forecast TFR over the projection horizon. In general, the
target TFR in 2100 for districts with a current TFR below 1.50 would
be between 1.55 and 1.60, and for those with current TFR above 1.50,
it would be between 1.70 and 1.80. The UN model has shown that
districts in eastern Serbia represent the nucleus of low TFR in the
country, i.e. that the potential for a positive change in this indicator
is the weakest in this area. A slightly higher forecast of TFR would
characterise the surrounding districts in the region of Southern and
Eastern Serbia and certain districts of Vojvodina. According to the
UN model, the maximum target TFR was projected for western and
southwestern districts in the region of Šumadija and West Serbia.
These findings were supported by the results of the spatial autocorre-
lation analysis with respect to change in TFR between 2002 and 2011
at the municipal level in Serbia, which suggested that differences in
economic, historical, and cultural development between sub-regions
of the country have strongly affected the spatial patterns of fertility
change (Nikitović et al., 2019).
2.1.2	 Baseline mortality assumption
Mortality assumption in the baseline scenario has also resulted from
the application of the UN model. The same procedure as in the case
of the hypothesis on fertility was applied. Adjustments were made
to the input data regarding the coverage of the territory and the cho-
sen level of its administrative division (districts), while for each dis-
trict a median of the prediction interval that resulted from the UN
model was taken as the baseline scenario of life expectancy at birth
(e0) over the projection horizon. In the initial projection period, the
short-term effect of the COVID-19 pandemic was taken into account.
If expressed through e0, first, there was a decrease in this indicator
compared to the previous period, followed by its relatively rapid re-
covery immediately after the pandemic ends in accordance with the
nature of the influence of exogenous factors. An observed decrease in
e0 was an average 1.55 years during 2020, with an assumed maximum
decline of 2.5 years during the expected time-span of the pandemic
(about 3 years).
Depending on the current e0, an increase in this indicator for women
fr