in the given time frame is negative. The net emigration
is highest among the three youngest age cohorts; cohort 25-29 has
high net immigration, and that reverts again into high net emigration
among the two oldest age cohorts. The cumulative net emigration to-
tal between 2015 and 2019 within the 15–39 age group (as of 2010, in-
clusive of those reaching 15 years of age in the meantime) is estimated
at -37,400 people. This estimate appears to be lower than expected
but still within a plausible range.
However, the most important finding of Leitner’s statistical analysis
is that, contrary to intuition and widespread perceptions, over the
observed period there is net immigration of the highly educated,
i.e. those with college and university degrees. On the other hand,
the analysis finds high net-emigration flows of those with Med-VET
and Med-GEN skills. Second, as the largest country in the Western
Balkans, Serbia has universities that attract a sizeable share of Ser-
bian-speaking students from neighbouring countries, notably Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Montenegro, but also from elsewhere. It is very
plausible that the retention rates of high-skilled student immigrants
from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro are higher than cor-
responding rates for Serbian students elsewhere, with overall positive
net migration balance.
Leitner found that net emigration was mainly driven by those with
a medium level of education leaving the country (Graph 3), espe-
cially among Med-VETs, which is the largest group among Serbia’s
medium-educated, representing almost three quarters of all medi-
um-skilled in 2018. Nevertheless, because the net emigration rates
are relatively modest, in relative terms, the loss of people with Med-
VET as their highest level of educational attainment was relatively
small. Furthermore, there was non-negligible net emigration of Med-
GENs, much smaller in absolute but sizeable in relative terms.
It is interesting to note that these skill-differentiated emigration pat-
terns in the period 2015-2019 identified by the cohort approach out-
lined above are exactly the opposite to those identified on the basis
of destination country statistics up to 2010 contained in the IAB’s
brain-drain database. This could mean that the V-pattern of Serbian
emigration stock by skill levels has flattened, and together with the
finding of a net immigration of high-skilled might indicate a signifi-
cant improvement in comparison with the already relatively favoura-
ble skill structure of Serbian emigration in 2010.
As mentioned, another recent research (Arandarenko, 2021) also
questioned this dominant narrative on brain drain as the main wor-
risome aspect of Serbian emigration. In this study, the main destina-
tion countries were divided into those mostly receiving high-skilled
Serbian immigrants, and others, taking mostly medium- and low-
skill immigrants. Assuming no major changes in relative skill struc-
ture of Serbian immigrants by countries, a more dynamic increase of
stock of Serbian immigrants in ‘brain-drain’ countries would, due to
the composition effect, suggest the worsening of skill balance of Ser-
bian emigrants, and vice versa.
Anglo-Saxon countries are world leaders in attracting ‘global talents’,
that is, high-skilled immigrants. They have flexible labour markets
open to outsiders and high returns to education and skills. Particularly
Canada and Australia actively encourage high-skill immigration with
their points-based systems. Traditionally, the United States and the
United Kingdom also attract many high-skilled immigrants from Ser-
bia. Outside of that group, the Netherlands has introduced a tax-relief
scheme for young talents that makes it especially attractive for young
university graduates. The data from Serbian population censuses,
however incomplete (e.g Stanković, 2014) and some comprehensive
case studies (e.g. Despić, 2015) fully confirm that high-skill emigrants
dominate or at least comprise about half of tota