he development of educa-
tion, and contribute to new problems in the quality and equity of ed-
ucation, eventually enlarging the negative impact of depopulation on
human capital in Serbia.
There are several mechanisms for increasing teacher salaries. Salary
increase can be connected to top-ups for additional engagements or
unfavourable working conditions, or to years of experience in order to
make the teaching profession more attractive to novice teachers.  Ty-
ing salary increases to additional qualifications in critical competency
areas (such as digital education or inclusive education) can motivate
teachers to engage in implementing new policies. Increase can also be
linked to system of career advancement that includes professional de-
velopment and innovation activities. Furthermore, of course, an over-
all increase of certain percentage should be planned within the budget.
Serbia currently uses only the first mechanism – salaries increase with
seniority and as top-ups with additional engagements in school ac-
tivities such as form master duties, holding additional classes above
the norm, and working in remote areas with multigrade classes. The
incentive value of this mechanism is very low – years of service are
accumulated irrespective of quality, and the top ups are not a sta-
ble increase, allocation of such possibilities are negotiated between
teachers and the principal on a yearly basis and can depend on in-
terpersonal and intragroup processes not related to the quality of the
teachers’ pedagogical work.
A new incentive mechanism was established in the early 2000’s and ad-
ditionally specified several times since86 – career advancement through
4 levels, connected to relevant professional development, innovation,
quality assessments and coupled with salary increase. This system has,
however, not been fully implemented, and only a small percentage of
132
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
teachers have acquired higher titles to date. This system, however, has
not been fully implemented, and only a small percentage of teachers
have acquired higher titles to date. Those who have, still have not re-
ceived salary increases, as the current fiscal legislation does not recog-
nize the career ladder in education as relevant (Eurydice, 2018).
Establishing an effective and relevant incentive structure that mobi-
lizes teachers for developing their practice is paramount for an effec-
tive education system, therefore neglecting this area should not be
an option. As a rule, a more developed economy can create teacher
shortages, as teachers have new, better options of employment, and
vice versa, economic downfall increases the teaching force, as pro-
fessionals from closing businesses seek a teaching career. In the next
section, human resources management in education is discussed.
4.1.2	 Planning and management of
teachers is not well developed and
teachers’ wellbeing is jeopardized.
Serbia is among those rare countries that do not use any planning mo-
dalities regarding the teacher workforce, either at national or municipal
level (Eurydice, 2018). Data on the teaching force is unclear, especially in
respect of full time and part time teachers as well as teachers with tempo-
rary or tenure contracts. Moreover, the data are not readily retrievable for
any policy, research or intervention purposes. The fact that teachers are
employed by schools and not by LSGs or regional or national authorities
contributes to the fragmentation in the teachers’ data. Therefore, qualifi-
cation mismatches, shortages and oversupplies of the teaching force are
present, that create both teacher dissatisfaction and lost investments in
the area of teacher education. Serbia is among a small number of Europe-
an countries (with Portugal and Lithuania) that face both teacher short-
ages and oversupply, as well as shortages of students in initial teacher
education (Eurydice, 