ewer than in 1991.
Today, Serbia has the same number of inhabitants as half a century ago,
but the population is much older, so the future decline is quite certain.
The projections show that the population of Serbia will decrease by 1.4
million or one fifth by the middle of the century (Nikitović, 2022). If that
scenario comes true, Serbia will remain among the countries in Europe
and the world that are losing their population the fastest.
Population decline will affect the whole country, but it will not affect
all parts of the country equally. Belgrade will lose 3.8% of its popula-
tion, Vojvodina 19.4%, Šumadija and Western Serbia 28.5%, Southern
and Eastern Serbia 33.4%, and Southeastern Serbia over 40%. Popu-
lation will shrink less in those parts of Serbia that can attract internal
Leading local and international demographers agree that it is unlike-
ly that Serbia’s demographic decline will stop, and that adaptation to
depopulation is inevitable (Coleman & Rowthorn, 2013: 83; Nikitović,
2018). In this Human Development Report, we assume that no particu-
lar population size, specific growth rate, specific fertility rate, or spe-
cific age structure is considered an end in itself. Instead of striving to
achieve some quantitative goals, population policies should manage
our public human resources efficiently and flexibly to achieve the
highest long-term well-being of present and future generations (Lutz
& Gailey, 2020: 31).
This approach marks the transition from quantity to quality. The
public discourse and political response to demographic change was
focused on the question of number: number of inhabitants, number
of children and number of migrants. This Human Development Report
advocates for an approach designated as quantity and quality. Fu-
ture population policies will not be able to give up quantity, but they
will not be able to disregard quality either. At some point, quantity
migrants (Belgrade, Novi Sad, Niš and Subotica) and in the Raška dis-
trict, which has a younger population and higher fertility rates.
Balanced regional development can balance migration and thus slow
down depopulation in certain parts of the country. If migration is not
balanced, the growth in fertility will not help, because it will bene-
fit large centres that attract population. Moreover, pro-natal policies
that stimulate long-term births may have effects at the national level,
but without the balancing of migration the cost will be high: further
regional inequalities, uneven demographic development of rural are-
as, shrinking and ageing labour force in mountainous and border ar-
eas, especially in their rural communities and marked depopulation
and ageing of most areas in Serbia (Nikitović, 2022).
At the national level, migration management is one of the key availa-
ble strategies. Obstacles to immigration could be economic, because
Serbia is not yet a sufficiently attractive destination country, but also
cultural and political, due to potential resistance to the arrival of mi-
grants, especially those who differ in culture from our population
(Nikitović, 2019: 221).
turns into quality: if there are fewer of us, each inhabitant becomes
a more valuable resource (Buchanan & Rotkirch, eds. 2013). That is
why demographers recommend that population policies be focused
on strengthening human resources (Lutz, 2014; Nikitović, 2019), and
one of the key mechanisms is investing in education. Investing in ed-
ucation is important because it brings a number of benefits: educated
people will be healthier, they will live longer and be the basis of eco-
nomic growth, while education has a beneficial effect on democracy
and civil liberties, but also on our ability to adapt to climate change
(Lutz, 2014: 640; Nussbaum, 2006: 385-286). Population policies will
then be seen as “managing public human resources” (Lutz and Gai-
ley, 2020).
Although higher education is often associated with lower fertility
rates, it is significant because it improves society’s