Authors
Dragan Stanojević
Dragica Pavlović Babić
Gordana Matković
Jelisaveta Petrović
Mihail Arandarenko
Nicholas Gailey
Vladimir Nikitović
Wolfgang Lutz
Željka Stamenković
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022
Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Publisher
UNDP Srbija
Editor
Danilo Vuković
Translation
Irena Znidaršić-Trbojević
Proofreading
Irena Znidaršić-Trbojević, Marija Popović, Jelena Žarković
Design and layout
Bojan Stefanović, Studio Logoholik
Statements made in this report are the statements of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the United Nations Development Programme or the United Nations
Population Fund.
ISBN-978-86-7728-354-4
Foreword
4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
The Republic of Serbia has one of the most rapidly declining populations in the world. In the past two decades, the number
of people has dropped by a million, reaching 6.87 M today. This trend is shaped by years of emigration and declining fertil-
ity rates. At the same time, the population in the Republic of Serbia is aging and urbanising. There is an acceleration of the
concentration of people and resources in fewer urban centres while many regions are left without sufficient opportunities for
people to work and prosper. Together, these fundamental quantitative and qualitative changes create new realities across
the country, and future development may well be conditioned by how society adapts and responds to demographic change.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia has recognised demographic change as a priority and boldly initiated new con-
versations on this topic, as well as making concrete investments in several critical areas - such as infrastructure, digital trans-
formation, and education. This National Human Development Report aims to shed new light on a highly complex set of
challenges and opportunities related to population change and to offer an enlarged landscape for policy action.
Traditionally, responding to demographic change has been framed around numbers: can population decline be reversed,
and how? But change is not only about numbers - and it is not entirely negative. With people becoming a scarce resource,
the Republic of Serbia can redefine what it takes to be a thriving and productive society. The country can invest in its hu-
man capital and create opportunities for every individual to contribute to the fullest - whoever and wherever they may be.
Challenging traditional ideas on age, family dynamics, and migration, a new approach for adapting to demographic change
should be closely aligned to Serbia’s innovation and digital agendas. The society of the future will be smaller, more urban,
older, and wealthier - and it can reap the benefits of the digital revolution and engage the country’s globally-based human
capital to reinvent work, industry and learning. The fifth National Human Development Report for Serbia (NHDR), Human
Development in Response to Demographic Change, sets the challenge of decreasing overall population in its development
context, for the first time outlining a broad range of policies that can serve to address it. It introduces new and sometimes
provocative ideas, such as busting myths around increasing long-term emigration, proposing to prioritise mid-sized towns
over rural areas, or initiating discussions around links between population change and environmental protection. It positions
social inclusion as an essential component in addressing population decline.
UNDP and UNFPA are committed to continued partnership with the Republic of Serbia on this issue. This report is part of
a broader investment into understanding and addressing a seemingly impossible, wicked problem. It sets out an ambitious
path for transformative change. In developing this path, we discovered a broad and vibrant ecosystem of actors in Govern-
ment, civil society, academia and private sector, along with a wealth of 