g to findings, the
key advantage of this type of pensions is that its implementation
does not require high administrative capacities. The cited weak-
nesses are relatively high additional expenditure for the older
persons in some variants and the inclusion error since recipients
may live in more affluent households.
4.3 Introducing a dedicated
module in the financial social
assistance (FSA) scheme
Introducing a dedicated module in the FSA scheme would be aimed
at reducing poverty among the old persons  based on means tested
targeting.
According to earlier research, the key FSA access barriers for old per-
sons  were asset ownership criteria (especially land ownership), lack
160 Excluding those who are still active and those receiving a pension from abroad.
161 According to PDI Fund data, in December 2019, over 90% of pensioners under farmers’ insurance received the minimum pension or less. The minimum pension
amounted to RSD 11,273 (approx. €95) for this category (Republički fond za penzijsko i invalidsko osiguranje, 2020a:12).
177
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
of awareness, complicated administrative procedures and presence
of relatives with a legal duty of maintenance (Matković & Stanić,
2014).
Old-age poverty reduction efforts should, thus primarily focus on
relaxing or eliminating asset ownership criteria in FSA eligibility as-
sessment. As the first step, raising the land ownership ceiling to 2 ha
for old-person households may be considered. Although the Law on
Social Protection provides for the possibility of mortgaging land in
order to access FSA, research shows that the poor are mainly unaware
of this option, and the older population also shows resistance to such
arrangements (Matković & Stanić, 2014). Eliminating all asset own-
ership criteria for old-person households with a maximum uptake
would lead to an increase in FSA yearly expenditures by 0.2% of the
GDP (Matković & Stanić, 2014:158).
For the old who live in old-person households and are out of the la-
bour force by definition, increasing the assistance amount may be
proposed as well, since disincentive to work does not pose a barrier
to improving benefit adequacy. The hierarchical logic, whereby as-
sistance should not exceed insurance-based benefits, suggests the
farmer pension level as the upper limit for raising the FSA base. In
households without members able to work, the weights for the sec-
ond or third member may, however, be increased to 1 or at least 0.7
(from the current level of 0.5).
Earlier calculations show that reliance on an income test alone (elim-
inating asset ownership criteria) combined with weight increase to
0.7 for the second household member would result in additional FSA
expenditure amounting to 0.26% of the GDP (Matković & Stanić,
2014:158).
Another possibility is to set the age threshold for relaxed eligibility
requirements or higher assistance amounts at 5 years above the re-
tirement age. This would reduce the moral hazard in terms of any
negative impact that the introduction of a rudimentary form of social
pensions might have on the payment of PDI contributions.
The key advantage of a dedicated module in the FSA scheme compared
to GMIOP is the smaller inclusion error, as the eligibility criterion is
household income, rather than individual income. In addition, this
option would involve lower expenditure, especially in some scenarios.
C H A P T E R 8
Branislav Antonić
Urban And Spatial Aspects Of
Depopulation In Serbia
180
C H A P T E R 8
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Depopulation at national level has become one of the main develop-
ment challenges for many European countries. It has profound in-
terrelations with the decline at all territorial levels: depopulating re-
gions, municipalities, cities and villages. The depopulation of villages
and rural regions is probabl