ress more systematically the possible economic chal-
lenges associated with population shrinking one can first think in
terms of undesirable imbalances arising in the process.8 The first im-
balance refers to ageing, which is typically associated with population
shrinking. This in turn is creating the well-known problem of a (pos-
sible) increase in economic dependency due to the older, more de-
pendent population. The policy challenge is to offset this by ensuring
human capital investments, besides increases in female labour force
participation and raising the retirement age.
A second possible imbalance lies in the geographical distribution of
the population, since in many empirically observed cases of popu-
lation shrinking there is a tendency for the population to cluster in
agglomerations, which implies: (a) regionally differentiated process-
es of localised shrinkage (or even growth) of populations, which are
typically characterised by strong inter-regional migration within the
country; (b) cross-regional gradients (often an urban-rural gradient)
in terms of the scope or needs for policy-making or even the direction
of policy-making (for example, policy needs for the housing market,
calling for expansion in agglomerations, but for “downsizing” in rural
areas and minor towns). In addition, there are cross-regional patterns
of behaviors and attitudes, as well as spillovers (for example, with
respect to all the incentives that govern migration); and (c) popula-
tion sorting (for example, the young and educated moving into ag-
glomerations, leaving the old and lesser-skilled behind), which is a
particular challenge in cross-regional migration (and may reinforce
cross-regional imbalances).
Finally, in terms of aggregate economic activity, population shrinking
(all else equal) will typically reduce total GDP or lead to lower aggre-
gate growth in a country. However, unless pure size of a population
is one of the most important factors (for example, for defense, or the
ability to undertake large-scale investments in infrastructure), the fo-
cus should be on per capita values because this is what matters for
the economic well-being of people. Interestingly, lower population
growth is traditionally perceived as beneficial for per capita income.
The reasoning for this is weaker capital dilution: less investment is
needed to equip new workers with capital (and thereby maintain
the capital stock per capita) so that a given volume of savings can
be invested to increase the capital stock per worker and, thus, raise
labour productivity. Lower population growth can bring other eco-
8 This section benefited greatly from scientific input from Michael Kuhn.
49
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
nomic benefits in terms of higher female labour force participation,
the quality-quantity trade-off as a facilitator of human capital invest-
ment, and the weakening of congestion effects (related to common
infrastructure, the environment, etc.). But there are also possible
offsetting effects that negatively influence per capita income in the
event of lower population growth: scale effects (or reverse scale ef-
fects) of a dwindling population can lead to reductions in specialisa-
tion and slower innovation, as well as imbalances in the supply and
demand for labour leading to mismatch and possible brain-drain ef-
fects (in open economies), especially if there is selective migration.
While this list of possible economic implications of population shrink-
ing is only a summary from the state-of-the-art economics literature,
this list also presents a research agenda for deeper and empirical anal-
ysis of the various different mechanisms at work that can have offset-
ting effects in competing directions. In other words, from a theoreti-
cal point of view, it is not clear at all whether the economic effects of
population shrinking are on balance positive or negative. The 