y the most known as it has been present
since the post-war decades. However, the phenomenon of depopulat-
ing countries in a peacetime period is more correlated to the recent
urban depopulation. Most post-socialist European countries have ex-
perienced demographical shrinking with the fall of socialism, which
caused the sudden and uncontrolled deindustrialisation and there-
fore the rapid decline of urban population. Similarly, Portugal and
Greece began to demographically shrink during the economic crisis
of 2008, when their service-based urban economy fell into a crisis.
Bulgaria and Romania are especially indicative in this sense, as they
are the poorest and most shrinking EU countries, as well as the only
ones with more than 90% shrinking cities (Restrepo Cadavid et al...,
2017). These arguments clearly show that the demographic state of
urban settlements, i.e., urban growth vs. urban decline, has become
one of the key indicators of (de)population trends at national level.
Serbia also shows the aforementioned demographic-territorial pat-
terns. Rural depopulation was identified in all population censuses
since the 1960s, and all national spatial plans in the second half of
the century have underlined this as a great challenge, but planned
measures to deal with rural exodus have not had a significant impact.
Post-socialist period has just propelled the problem with depopulation
at new levels. Two national post-socialist population censuses, done
in 2002 and 2011, showed the first signs of simultaneous demographic
crisis at both national and urban levels. The last census in 2011 was
the first after the overall majority of urban settlements (74%) demo-
graphically shrunk, which was in a sharp contrast to the growth of four
major cities – Belgrade, Novi Sad, Niš, and Kragujevac. This can be ex-
plained by the fact that Serbia is a country with highly centralised gov-
ernment in major cities, where intermediate level, the administrative
districts, does not exist as independent entities. Such situation leaves
the district seats, Serbian middle-sized cities, without a real econom-
ical power and demographic and social potential, so they can not be
an adequate interlink between major cities and rural hinterlands. As a
result, the depopulation of middle-sized cities speeds up the depopu-
lation of their districts, subordinated smaller-rural municipalities and
the most of villages in their gravitation zones.
An additional problem is that Serbia does not have natural borders
with highly developed European countries or worldwide tourist at-
tractions, such as Adriatic seaside for Croatia or Prague for Czech
Republic. Hence, external poles for repopulation and redevelopment
do not exist and internal territorial balance seems to be critical one
for demographic development of the country. Taking in account that
by these characteristics Serbia is similar to the aforementioned Bul-
garia and Romania, the future demographic prospects of both coun-
try and urban settlements is questionable. In the other hand, this also
implies that the improvement of the socio-economic situation of
medium-sized Serbian cities can have a great positive impact on their
regions, districts and rural development.
This importance of cities for general depopulation trends is not relat-
ed just to Serbia or Europe – it is a consequence of the rising share of
urban population worldwide. Urban population has become globally
dominant since about ten years ago. The United Nations (UN) world
urbanisation report underlines that 55% of the world’s population re-
sided in cities in 2018, and this share is expected to rise to 70% in 2050.
Larger cities will grow the fastest (UN, 2019). All these data indirectly
demonstrate that the issues of the development of cities, especially
the multimillion ones, will have an increasing importance in the de-
velopment of the planet. In addition, urban development is crucial for
spatial development in general, for regional development and