efore, one option
would be the introduction of mandatory check-ups of all employees
in the public and private sector. Once a year, preventive check-ups
lead to the early diagnosis, timely treatment and better outcome of
the majority of diseases. A limitation with this type of examination
would be the high share of workers in the informal labour market,
who do not pay taxes and healthcare contributions, and therefore
cannot achieve the entitlement to preventive examinations.
In addition to general health examinations, health screening pro-
grammes have an important role in health prevention. Although
there are three national screening programmes (for breast cancer
(Decree on the National Breast Cancer Early Detection Programme,
2013), colon cancer (Decree on the National Programme for Early
Detection of Colorectal Cancer, 2013), and cervical cancer (Decree
on the National Programme for Early Detection of Cervical Cancer,
2013) in the Republic of Serbia, they are not fully implemented.
The National Programme for the Early Detection of Breast Cancer is
implemented by organizing mammography examinations of healthy
women between the ages of 50 and 69. Detection of breast cancer at
an early stage, in addition to a high chance of cure, enables the appli-
cation of sparing surgical interventions, rapid recovery, reduced disa-
bility, better quality of life, and reduced treatment costs and indirect
costs of the disease.
Cytological screening of the cervix every three to five years can pre-
vent four out of five cases of cervical cancer. In countries, mostly
developed, where organized screening programmes have been suc-
cessfully implemented for several decades, there has been a dramatic
decline in cervical cancer mortality, such as in the Republic of Fin-
land, by as much as 80%. A cytological smear of the cervix (Papanico-
laou test) is used as a screening test for early detection of changes in
the cervix. European guides recommend that screening should start
between 20 and 30 years of age, and last up to the age of 60-65.
Screening for colorectal cancer is conducted in the territory of the
Republic of Serbia in the form of an organized, decentralized pro-
gramme. The target populations are men and women aged 50 to 74,
and the screening cycle is every two years.
However, the coverage of the target population with national screen-
ing programmes is very low and huge efforts are needed in order to
achieve it. Evidence-based data support the fact that certain inter-
ventions can significantly increase the screening coverage of the pop-
ulation. These interventions are based on different approaches and
can be targeted at the individual, the community, health profession-
als, or the health services and management themselves (Camilloni et
al., 2013; Zielonke et al., 2021).
When it comes to individual interventions, an invitation letter com-
bined with a reminder sent by mail has shown a positive effect, as well
as phone calls. Different styles of invitation letters can affect partici-
pation in screening programmes. In particular, there is evidence that
long, detailed letters can increase inequalities in participation, i.e.
that a detailed explanation of the procedures, as well as the advantag-
es of the test itself, can encourage people to respond, especially those
with lower educational status. There is strong evidence of a positive
effect of the invitation letter being signed by a physician (Toes-Zou-
tendijk et al. 2017; Jepson et al. 2000; Globocan, 2022).
161
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
115 The National Health Account (NHR) is a framework for standardized reporting on health care costs and financing, measuring the overall - public and private and health
costs of a country’s population.
Community interventions, such as mass media campaigns, providing
publicity through different types of media, educational information
through pamphlets, leaflets 