ing jobs. It has also contributed to regional
labour market rebalancing, most notably in improving the quality of
employment in less developed regions and in stabilizing the shares of
regional wage funds. Still, labour market, educational and infrastruc-
ture cleavages between regions remain very large.
Serbian migration dynamics in terms of gross flows and distribution
of migrants by destination countries neatly fits the simple framework
of Roy’s model. During the 1990s, absolute wage differentials be-
tween Serbia and the rest of the world increased a lot because Serbian
GDP and real wages collapsed, causing general increase in emigra-
tion flows from Serbia. However, income inequality did not increase
much (Blanchet at al. 2021), and wages were further compressed,
which affected more the high-skilled workers. This resulted in their
higher emigration rates, further confirmed by the disproportional in-
crease in the Serbian immigrant flows to Anglo-Saxon countries, as
well as in the emergence of some new minor high-skill faraway des-
tinations, such as United Arab Emirates, Singapore, South Africa etc.
On the supply side of labour migration, Serbia during the Great Reces-
sion experienced extremely strong labour market contraction, since
the negative impact of prolonged transitional restructuring on em-
ployment coincided with the impact of the Great Recession. Between
2009 and 2012, GDP cumulatively fell by around 4%, while employ-
ment loss was over 12%. The rapidly increasing migration flows to the
EU in 2015–2019 period coincided with employment and GDP growth
in Serbia, however, the wages were, due to fiscal consolidation, kept
stagnant and wage differentials in relation to the EU further widened.
The largest decrease in real wages was recorded in 2015 and it can be
related in the first place to fiscal consolidation measures, but also to
changes in Labour Law in 2014 which reduced many monetary and
non-monetary rights of employees. One of fiscal consolidation meas-
ures was a 10% reduction in salaries in the public sector higher than
25,000 dinars. Given the number of employees in the public sector and
the fact that wages in the public sector are higher than in the private
sector, the introduction of a kind of solidarity tax has contributed to
a real decline in wages of almost 2.5%. Similarly, it was estimated that
reduction or abolishment of some monetary rights (such as mandatory
seniority premium, shift work premium, annual number of paid days
off etc.) had an additional effect of 2-3% reduction in average wage
(Arandarenko and Aleksić, 2016). Furthermore, the nominal minimum
wage, a very significant anchor in Serbia, was kept unchanged for three
years until 2017. Thus, real wages remained depressed until 2017, at the
time when they increased throughout Europe, increasing wage differ-
entials and making new destinations, including those in Central and
Eastern Europe, more attractive for Serbian workers.
Behind the fairly rapidly improving employment statistics, the prob-
lem of low-quality jobs remained throughout the period, especially
outside of the public sector. As a share of total employment, informal
employment stands at around 18%, and low work intensity and under-
employment in various forms are widespread. There is a pronounced
duality in the labour market. Large portions of the working-age popu-
lation are engaged in low-paid and less protected jobs. Access to the
more stable jobs in the primary labour market is limited (even more
so, since the onset of fiscal consolidation programme in 2015), and
long-term career-planning is hampered by the precariousness of jobs
in the secondary labour market, those in the latter are eager to switch
jobs and a significant proportion of these workers is migration-ready.
Thus, the lack of availability of good jobs is a stronger determinant of
migration readiness within the Serbian labour force members than the
general unemployment rate and individuals’ own employment status.