 labour
market, is among other factors also reflected in labour participation
rates, making the simple use of age as the sole indicator of productiv-
ity, as described above, harder to defend. As shown by the labour force
dependency ratio (the red line in Figure 3), when taking into account
actual labour participation rather than using the crude assumption
that participation and productive life ends at 65 and everybody below
age 65 participates in the labour market at the same rates, a large por-
tion of the feared-increase in dependency never happens. This is due
to improving participation rates among the general population and
particularly women, but also due to those at older ages.
It is not only for the reason of economic sustainability that labour par-
ticipation should be encouraged even among older populations how-
ever, as studies show that well-being and connection with community
are key benefits that people get from continuing to work in their later
years. The precise definition of labour force participation differs by
survey, in particular with respect to participation in informal work,
which might have implications for pension systems depending on
how they are structured. The European Labour Force (“ELF”) Sur-
veys used for the projections in this section define workers broad-
ly, considering as part of the labour force, who is either working for
pay, self-employed, or looking for work. This, however, still does not
include other types of work, for example, as many women perform
work as mothers and caregivers, which is surely of great value to so-
ciety and allow families to save on the cost of otherwise outsourcing
some of these tasks.
With reference to the possible impacts of the current COVID-19 cri-
sis, a lot depends on whether people still in the working ages will suf-
fer lasting health consequences that will make them less productive.
While it seems clear that in terms of mortality the highest age groups
and people with already multiple health problems are most seriously
affected by COVID-19, which would actually lower the dependen-
cy in the future due to the so-called harvesting effect, the degree to
which working age people will be hampered in their productivity by
the pandemic is not yet clear.
The productivity-weighted dependency ratio (the blue line in Figure
3) adds another layer of consideration to demographic dependen-
cy ratios. This ratio accounts for the fact that not all individuals are
4  Human Capital and Labour Force Participation
40
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
equally productive in society. This ratio uses the educational compo-
sition of the population as a proxy for productivity (measured by dif-
ferent wage levels for different educational attainment groups) and
shows how trends suggest that there will be more economic output
produced per worker, given the improving levels of completed edu-
cation. While this effect may be diminished as the highest levels of
education become less selective and pursued by a larger proportion
of the population, making it less of a sorting mechanism at the higher
end of the spectrum, education is importantly linked to adaptability,
among other skills. Such skills are ever-valuable in the context of the
changing nature of work (particularly with the onset of more remote
work brought about by COVID-19), and the uncertainties that further
automation and artificial intelligence might bring.
Lastly, the productivity-weighted dependency ratio - Swedish scenar-
io (the dashed blue line in Figure 3) explores what demographic de-
Figure 3. : Different demographic dependency ratios predicting the economic burden of demographic changes (primarily, an ageing population)
across segments of the population for select countries in the region, 2015-2060)
Source: Marois, Bélanger, and Lutz, 2020
0.6
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
2055
2060
0.8
0.1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Bulgaria
P