 potential to devel-
op. For this reason, the state cannot give up education development
policies, but must develop nuanced policies that will support the
demographic development of all sections of society, including the
4  Message Two: There Are Fewer People and
They Are Becoming a Valuable Resource
As the population of a country is shrinking, each inhabitant becomes a more valuable resource for its future development. That is why
policies that integrate people into society, from integration in various fields, such as education, through health and the labour market, to
regional development, become a prerequisite for balanced demographic and general development of society and the state.
2 References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
21
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Depopulation is essentially a regional issue because it particularly affects certain parts of Serbia. Migrations from underdeveloped to
developed parts of Serbia are very pronounced. They are based on large regional inequalities. Therefore, for the balanced demographic
development of the country, the policies of balanced regional development are key, but also population policies that would be sensitive
to local and regional particularities.
highly educated. In addition to that, the issue of education cannot
be separated from health care, labour market, regional and urban de-
velopment and other dimensions of social and economic life, which
reflect the unwillingness of our society to “use” all available human
resources. That is why in this Human Development Report we show
that we need new economic, educational, health and other policies
that will be sensitive to demographic considerations.
In order to become responsive to population issues, sectoral policies
must become inclusive and cohesive. There is still a large “pool” of
non-integrated people, such as youth, lower socio-economic classes
For now, the population is growing in Belgrade, Novi Sad and Novi
Pazar, while in all other towns and municipalities in Serbia it is de-
clining or stagnating at best. Certain parts of Serbia are particularly
affected by the decrease in the number of inhabitants: rural and bor-
der areas, Southern, Eastern and Western Serbia. That is why depop-
ulation is essentially a regional issue.
The regional dimensions of depopulation are affected by differenc-
es in fertility. Developed areas around Belgrade and Novi Sad have
higher fertility rates than Eastern and Southeastern Serbia, although
the average age at first birth is above the national average (Nikitović,
Arsenović, Sekulić & Bajat, 2019). However, internal migrations
have an even stronger impact, taking place under two simplified pat-
terns: from rural to urban areas, that is, from towns to cities with the
south-north direction dominating. Only five districts have a positive
balance of internal relocations, the centres of which are the largest
cities in the country: Belgrade, Novi Sad, Niš, Kragujevac and Suboti-
ca. These cities are university, economic, cultural and administrative
centres, which is the basis of their attraction force.
Internal migration is based on large regional inequalities. According to
the level of economic development, Serbia today is divided into three
parts. Belgrade and Novi Sad are the most developed areas, character-
ised by high population density, high employment rate and a higher
GDP per capita. Two thirds of Serbia’s GDP is generated in this area.
They are followed by about 15 districts in Vojvodina and Central Ser-
bia, which are at the level of the national average, while the least de-
or residents of underdeveloped regions. Serbia will feel the problem
of population shortage less if it is able to integrate those children,
adults and older persons dropping out of the education system and
the (formal) labour market now, if it is able to p