d by new member states, with the exception
of Norway (not in the EU) and United Kingdom and Netherlands.
Cumulative naturalization rate (expressed as ratio or relative differ-
ence between Concept 2 and Concept 1 stocks in 2019) also varies
widely. It is highest for the United Kingdom, Sweden, Switzerland,
France, Italy, Hungary, Netherlands and Belgium.  On the other
hand, it is quite low or negligible in most new member states. The
difference between new and old member states (OMS and NMS here-
after) in this regard can be explained by several factors. First, OMS
are mature and well established migrant destinations where average
duration of stay is much longer, and for individual migrants to be able
to apply for citizenship, there is usually a minimum residence period
requirement. Second, the bar (criteria) for naturalization set by most
NMS might be generally higher than of OMS. Third, the demand of
Serbian immigrants for citizenship of old and richer EU MS is strong-
er than for that of new and poorer EU MS (except in those MS with
significant ethnic minorities in Serbia, such as Hungary). Fourth, the
structure and characteristics of Serbian immigrants might systemati-
cally differ from one country to another.
The summation of cumulative net flows in the period 2010-2019 (or
somewhat shorter in several cases) for all countries for which the data
are available on Eurostat - EU MS excluding Denmark, but including
Switzerland and Norway - yields widely different results with differ-
ent signs depending on which concept is used. While according to
Concept 1, the net outflow of Serbian immigrants from this ‘Eurostat
universe’ is around 88,000, according to Concept 2 there was net im-
migrant inflow (that is negative net migration from Serbia) of around
41,000. Spread over 10 years, the Concept 2, estimate would imply
average annual outflow to the ‘Eurostat universe’ of around 4,100
Serbian citizens.
Our ‘Eurostat-Europe’ net emigration estimates appear to be overall
lower than the estimates of SORS (2019), with sometimes wide varia-
tion across individual countries.55
Cumulative Serbian overall net migration balance for the period
2011-2018 estimated by SORS was around -97,000, implying average
annual net outflow of some 13,000 people with increasing negative
trend reaching 22,000 in 2018 and projected to get close to 30,000
in 2020. According to SORS, the estimated net negative migration
for countries of  our ‘Eurostat-Europe’ in the period 2011-2018 was
roughly similar to the global number, since Serbia has significant net
immigration from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro,  which
is enough to keep in check relatively mild net outflow to the rest of
the world. However, the main discrepancy between the two estimates
arose from two important European destinations. The case of Cro-
atia is interesting – according to our calculation and based on stock
and naturalization data from Eurostat, there was a strong net inflow
of Serbian citizens into Croatia (by over 10,000 between 2013-2019),
while SORS estimates are completely different implying net immi-
gration into Serbia of some 15,000 persons between 2011-2018. The
possible reason for these opposing estimates, both based on files
from the Eurostat database, lies in different citizenship regimes in
two countries – while Croatia does not allow double citizenship (al-
though informally tolerates it), Serbia does. This potentially causes
overcounting and asimmetry in billateral and by extension global ac-
counting of migration flows and stocks, and is just an illustration of
the many migration statistics challenges.
On the other hand, by far the largest difference between two esti-
mates is regarding the most important destination country – Germa-
ny. While according to harmonized Eurostat database which we used,
the Concept 2 the stock of Serbians dropped by some 30,000 persons
(2010-2019), according to the SORS estimates and based on German
statistical data, there was net inflo