ury” it was
suggested that the goal of population policies ought to be to strength-
en the human resource base for national development as well as glob-
al sustainable development (Lutz, 2014). Population policies with this
purpose can be viewed as “public human resource management,” to
stress an analogy that is widely understood among the private sector.
Under this approach no certain population size, specific growth rate,
set fertility rate, or a particular age structure is viewed as a goal in
its own right. Within the human rights framework, population poli-
cies should – rather than achieve what could be arbitrary targets – try
instead to efficiently and flexibly manage our public human resourc-
es to achieve the highest long-term well-being of current and future
generations.
Similar to a big company which tries to advance the skills of its em-
ployees and retain the talent it employs, a national government
should also have consistent and coherent strategies that strengthen
the skills and maintain the well-being of their population as a way to
help its people establish satisfying lives and build up the human re-
source base of their country. The instruments for pursuing such aims
involve a broad range, from family and social security policies, to ed-
ucation and health policies, to migration and labour market policies.
Education in particular, as the most important state institution for
preparing young people, should prioritise giving the next generation
the skills (quality and type) a country needs from its labour force for
meeting its collective needs, both to the benefit of individuals and the
country as a whole. Such policies to limit gaps in skills should involve
several of the existing ministries which typically work in isolation on
specific sectors rather than feeling responsible for cross-cutting col-
laboration to jointly address the different aspects of human resourc-
es. It might even be worth thinking about the creation of a new co-
ordinating agency (or new ministry) directly reporting to the Prime
Minister that would oversee the synergistic collaboration of public ef-
forts to this end. Comprehensively addressing the challenge of public
human resource management can help to integrate the often separate
policy areas into one overarching policy to the benefit of each coun-
try, its economy, and its population.
For highly developed countries, a lack of coordination on these mat-
ters and resulting labour shortages often mean that labour migration
policies compete against the goals of international aid or regional de-
velopment, all of which are expressed by the same government. As a
matter of good practice and to avoid these disconnects, there should
be explicit consideration of how relevant policy decisions impact the
human capital resources of the countries of origin in the case of high
out-migration areas. Already in the 1970s these concerns sparked
heated discussion at the UN after economists Bhagwati and Dellalfar
proposed a tax on professional and technical emigrants from devel-
oping countries to help repay the communities for their consuming of
the developing country’s limited educational resources, and transfer-
rance of this “wealth” and the unrealised contributions they were ex-
pected to make in the richer countries rather than their home country
(Bhagwati and Dellalfar, 1973). This was seen as administratively and
even more so politically difficult to implement, but it is not without
precedent that a country requires a tax relationship with its citizens
abroad, as for example the U.S. today requires of its citizens working
abroad. While Bhagwati and Dellalfar’s direct correction of external-
ities focused on the individual who had benefited from a developing
country’s investment in them, later variations of the proposal dealt
with the topic at the country-level, requiring the active recognition of
the problem by governments and potentially uncomfortable changes
on the part of the highly developed co