 2.5 EU limit value
Užice
Valjevo
Niš - OŠ Sv. Sava
Niš - IZIZ
Kragujevac
Beograd - D. Stefana GZZIZ
Beograd - Mostar
Beograd - Novi Beograd
Beograd - Vračar
Beograd - Zeleno brdo
Pančevo - Vatrogasni dom
Pančevo - Starčevo
Pančevo - Vojlovica
Sremska Mitrovica
Beograd - N. Beograd GZZIZ
Smederevo - Centar
Novi Sad - Rumenačka
Novi Sad - Spens
Vojvodina
Subotica
Novi Sad - Liman
Zaječar
Ovrenovac - Centar
Kostolac
Bor - Gradski park
Kraljevo
Kamenički vis - EMEP
Popovac
Kosjerić
good level of alignment with the EU acquis. However, Serbia has to
speed up implementation of the existing laws including air quality
plans, and further improve its air quality monitoring system. Adopting
the EU air quality index is stressed as a key recommendation. The un-
favourable situation with the air pollution in Serbia has prompted cer-
tain policy initiatives in this area, such as the development of the Air
Protection Program (WHO, 2019). However, it is only the initial phase.
3.2  Impact of air pollution on
public health, morbidity and
mortality in Serbia233
Exposure to air pollution, especially airborne particulate matter
(PM), is associated with increased mortality and morbidity, mostly
from cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. The World Health Or-
ganization (WHO) estimated that exposure to ambient air pollution
accounted for 4.2 million premature deaths globally in 2016, includ-
ing half a million in the WHO’s European region (WHO, 2019). These
particles have been recognized as the main risk factor associated with
air pollution. Around 83% of all deaths related to air pollution in Eu-
rope in 2015 can be attributed to PM2.5, particles, 14% to NO2234, and
the remaining deaths are attributed to ozone (Carvalho, 2019).
An analysis of the countries and territories with multiple deaths at-
tributed to air pollution, reveals that the region of Eastern and South-
231 https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/ambient-(outdoor)-air-quality-and-health(accessed 10/02/2022)
232
233 Although there is not enough space in this chapter to deal with the other sources of pollution in Serbia, one should keep in mind that they also have a certain negative
impact on the overall health and livelihoods of people (for more information see: Environmental Report, 2019).
234 nitrogen dioxide
220
C H A P T E R 9
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Figure 9.  Health impacts of air pollution
Source: EEA, Healthy environment, healthy lives, 2019.
Headache and anxiety (SO2)
Impacts on the central nervous
system (PM)
Cardiovascular diseases
(PM, O3, SO2)
Impacts on liver, spleen and
blood (NO2)
Impacts on the reproductive
system (PM)
Irritation of eyes, nose and throat
Breathing problems (O3, PM, NO2,
BaP)
Irritation, inﬂammation and
infections
Asthma and reduced lung
function (NO2)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (PM)
Lung cancer (PM, BaP)
ern Europe has the lead, with Kosovo, Bulgaria, Serbia, Macedonia
and Hungary at the very top of the list (Table 2).
The annual mean PM2.5 levels for most of the countries and territo-
ries with an increased mortality rate are four times higher than the
WHO recommended level of 5 μg/m3.
According to the 2020 Report on Air quality in Europe (EEA, 2020:
158), it is estimated that over 16,000 people die prematurely in Ser-
bia due to the level of air pollutants being exceeded. Other sources
estimate the number of premature deaths due to air pollution to 6,592
(WHO, 2019) and 9,773 (Air Protection Programme in the Republic of
Serbia with an action plan236). Although estimations differ, it is clear
that the situation is far from good, as every year the population of a
small town disappears.
Estimations of premature deaths attributable to exceeding levels of
PM2.5 (WHO air quality guideline of 10 μg/m3) are summarized in
table 3. As estimated by WHO, 3,585 premature deaths in the 11 cities
can be attributed to exposure to exceeding levels of PM2.5. The esti