untries.
In Europe specifically, there is much talk of solidarity, which perhaps
in its most agreeable form can be defined as pursuing mutually bene-
ficial interactions of countries between and among each other. To the
extent indifference, or active recruiting and policy frameworks, fuel
persistent out-migration – especially of highly educated individuals
– from more economically vulnerable and depopulating neighbours,
such as between the Balkans and Western Europe, it should raise
questions of solidarity. This is perhaps easiest to understand and less
abstract when the outflows get dramatic, as in the case of Romania
losing more than 50% of its medical doctors to its fellow EU Mem-
bers over the last 10 years. A domino effect has ensued as Moldova
lost similar proportions of its medical doctors to Romania, with the
poorest most often paying the price in the end. For what is sometimes
talked about as a force of nature, these outflows are inevitably partial
products of political decisions or indecision in both the sending and
receiving countries. Besides the self-interest countries have for craft-
ing coherent national human capital management strategies with the
purpose of meeting their needs, it is also a matter of acting responsi-
bly for those leaders in the international community.
C H A P T E R 2
Vladimir Nikitović
Multifaceted Nature of
Depopulation in Serbia - Recent
Trends and Prospects
54
C H A P T E R 2
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
1  Demographic Challenges
Very low or negative rates of population change are among demo-
graphic issues of great concern in all countries of the developed
world. The population growth in Europe is the lowest of all the major
world regions, and the Europe’s population is expected to gradually
decline by the end of this century unlike the global population (Van
Nimwegen, 2013; United Nations, 2019b). Although the population of
the EU-27 is still growing but at a rather slow rate, which is assumed
to turn negative beyond 2050 (Eatock, 2019), 13 EU member states
have experienced decline in total population. Four of them are neigh-
bouring countries of Serbia: Croatia, Bulgaria, Hungary and Roma-
nia, all of which have been affected by a negative rate of population
change. In Croatia, Bulgaria and Romania, the population decline
was induced mostly by a negative natural change supplemented by
net emigration, while in Hungary it was solely due to a negative natu-
ral change. In all of them except in Hungary, the decline by more than
15 per cent is expected by 2050, which is the world highest according
to the UN Population Division (UN, 2019b).
1.1  Population change in Serbia
1.1.1	 General trends
The population in the current territory of the Republic of Serbia9 has
been continuously increasing during the period of the former Yugo-
slavia (1945-1991). However, since the dissolution of that country, the
population of Serbia has started to decline as indicated by the 2002
and 2011 censuses. As a result, the population size of Serbia was almost
the same in 1971 and 2011 and amounted to about 7.2 million inhabit-
ants (Fig. 1). However, the much older total population in 2011 when
compared to 1971, and its decreasing trend, keep the depopulation is-
sue very high on the agenda of Serbian policy makers in this century.
Yet, the tempo of the decreasing trend (1991-2020) seems to be slow-
er comparing to the increasing trend (1961-1981). The latest official
estimate suggests that the total resident population of Serbia has
been uniformly decreasing during the last three decades – about 300
thousand people per decade. However, if the undoubtedly negative
net international migration in the 2011-2020 period, which is officially
unknown, were to be accounted for, the estimated size of 6,871,547
residents at the end of 2020 (SORS, 2021a) would be certainly smaller.
Both components of population change – natural change and migra-
ti