 versa. Those high-skilled workers who leave the country will
tend to cluster in countries with high returns to skill, while the low-
skilled will seek the countries with compressed wage distribution,
relatively high minimum wages and more generous welfare benefits.
For a European country, Serbia has a very high income inequality.
While its government, since early 2000s collects and spends well
over 40% of a country’s GDP, for most of that period its Gini coef-
ficient was hovering only slightly below 40 points (Krstić, 2016). In
Central European countries with similar levels of government reve-
nue and expenditure, such as Czech Republic, Slovakia and Slovenia,
the Gini coefficient has been well below 30 points. Perhaps not coinci-
dentally, these were the three countries that did not experience mass
exodus of their population after the EU accession and they were also
the first to become net immigration countries among the NMS.
After 2000, comprehensive market and welfare reforms had quickly
increased income inequality in Serbia.  Far-reaching changes in the
system of labour taxation and the reduction in welfare entitlements,
part of which were realized at workplaces, directly affected low-wage
and younger workers, workers with larger families, those working in
labour-intensive sectors and living in poorer regions (Arandarenko
and Vukojević, 2008). According to the most comprehensive calcu-
lations based on a comprehensive novel methodology developed by
researchers from the Paris School of Economics using the World In-
equality Database, the share of national income going to the bottom
half of the population dropped from approximately 24% in 2000 to
only around 15% by 2015 (Blanchet, Chancel, & Gethin, 2020).
As part of the process of transition to a market economy and the de-
scribed strong pro-inequality policy turn, returns to education signif-
icantly increased compared with the 1990s. For example, the World
Bank, in 2018, estimated the rate of return to additional year of edu-
cation at ‘healthy’ 11.7%57, while Vuksanović et al. (2018) found that
this rate for youth was 9.3%, both results quite high internationally.
Decompression of wage distribution was, apart from market forces,
facilitated by the regressive reforms in labour taxation that included
abolishment of tax-free lump-sum fringe benefits, such as meal allow-
ance and vacation allowance, which for low-wage workers reached
up to one-third of job-related earnings by late 1990s. Furthermore,
instead of bringing penalty which was the case during 1990s (Jovano-
vnić and Lokshin, 2001) the employment in public sector, comprising
much higher proportion of high-skilled workers than the private sec-
tor, started bringing a sizeable premium, controlling feducation level
and other relevant factors (Vladisavljević, 2019).
Market reforms included the reduction in welfare entitlements.
Most importantly, child benefits instead of quasi-universal became
means tested, covering only around 25% of all children. In practice
that means that a family of four with two children becomes ineligi-
ble for child allowance if it has the total income some 20% above the
minimum wage or if it owns 2 hectares of agricultural land. The to-
tal expenditures on child allowance were reduced from 0.5% at the
beginning of 2000s to some 0.3% of GDP by 2010 and remained at
about that level by the end of 2010s (CLDS, 2014). Child benefits
were limited to three, and later to four children per mother, as part
of ‘responsible parenting’ policy. According to some interpretations
(Drezgić, 2008) such an approach was a part of thinly veiled discrim-
inatory population policy, attempting to discourage what was consid-
ered ‘excess’ fertility of certain ethnic minorities such as Albanians,
Moslems (Bosniaks) and Roma.
At the lower end of the migration spectrum, temporary migration
of the poorest strata of the population in search of welfare benefits
as asylum seekers to Western Europe, most notably to Germany,