showed a rather fa-
vourable trend over the past few decades: while in 1990 the Serbian
working age population had on average 9.91 years of schooling, this
increased to 11.16 years in 2000 and 12.06 years in 2015 (Reiter et
al., 2020). Based on actually-tested skills, the SAMYS increased even
more rapidly from 9.10 years in 1990 to 12.14 years in 2015. Hence,
39
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
adults’ skills today are even slightly above today’s OECD average
(by 0.1 years) and increased over the past 25 years by the equivalent
of more than three years of schooling. Similarly, the UN’s compre-
hensive index of various education measures shows a steady rise in
Population ageing and decline bring a set of clear macro-economic
challenges. These relate most immediately to the balance of contribu-
tions and payments and the solvency of pension funds, health services,
and other social policy programmes. Such national programmes tend
to differ substantially from one country to another and a proper assess-
ment of the resilience of the systems to specific demographic changes
requires a detailed model for each specific system, which is typically
only done within national social security administrations. For this rea-
son, comparative international assessments of the economic burden of
demographic changes tend to refer to more general ratios describing
the relative sizes of segments of the population that contribute to the
system and those that benefit from the system. These ratios are usually
called “demographic dependency ratios” and exist in several forms.
Conventionally, these demographic dependency ratios simply involve
the rather crude assumption that an individual’s contribution is en-
tirely based on their age, i.e. that adults contribute up to age 65 and
thereafter everybody is considered a dependent. However, multiple
factors including the changing nature of ageing itself require an up-
date as to how demographic change is considered. This has very real
implications for whether ageing is seen as having serious economic
consequences, or not. Use of chronological age to reflect economic de-
pendency does not do justice to the present-day reality where “age 70
is the new 60” – health and education measures among older persons
have vastly increased, extending the older population’s productivity
far beyond levels in the past. Often overlooked is the fact that even
when older persons require care, delivery of such care is an economic
activity, and contributes to the national economy in and of itself.
The simple age dependency ratio (the green line seen in Figure 3) is
still frequently used, but in many cases paints a misleading picture.
The projections below for five countries in and around the Balkan
region illustrate this point. The results come from a micro-simu-
lation model recently published for all EU member states (Mirdal,
Bélanger, and Lutz, 2020). These calculations do not include Serbia
but five other countries in the region and thus allow for some compar-
ison against countries that share similar context with Serbia. As can
be clearly seen, the age dependency ratio is expected to climb in all
of these countries, underpinning popular narratives and reporting of
upcoming economic doom. For some of these countries, the number
of dependents will seemingly outnumber the number of productive
workers by nearly 2 to 1 as of 2060. But these dramatic results obscure
important nuances and hide an otherwise uplifting story.
Serbia’s development (UNDP, 2020). Strategies for dealing with pop-
ulation ageing and associated questions of economic dependency
(which underscore the importance of human capital) are further cov-
ered in the next sections.
Viewed over the past decades, not only are lifespans longer, but we are
living more years in good health (rather than just living). This reality,
together with the changing role of women in society and the