l institutions, especially those for children under
3 years of age. It is necessary to detect the real needs of parents (es-
pecially those who would choose to work if there was a possibility of
employment and the existence of a childcare facility), a more balanced
regional development of this network and the involvement of vulnera-
ble groups are needed. Work should be done on solutions which would
enable parents who do not work to enrol their children in kindergarten,
because only in that way can they return to the labour market.
Financial measures are short-lived and cover the initial costs of child-
birth rather than long-term parenting support (for most parents). Given
that increasing fertility depends on the transition towards the second
child, the focus of financial measures should be on stimulating the
birth of the second child. It is recommended that the measure of pa-
rental allowance for the second child be extended, at least to the extent
which is now provided for the third and the fourth child.
Parental leave is relatively long, but not flexible enough. The propos-
al is to make it flexible (at least one part of it), which would mean 1.
the possibility of using the leave for child care in parts until the child
starts school, as well as its 2. extension with a proportional reduction of
salary compensation (for example, instead of three months, the parent
would use 6 months, and instead of 100% they would receive 50% of
the salary compensation in the given period). It is recommended that
5  Conclusion and Recommendations For
Practical Policies
93
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
6  Dimensions and Indicators of Orientation
Towards Family Needs
the parents of twins have twice the leave period for use for child care
(that is, that this leave be individual for each child).
Men are not stimulated to use leave for child care, so special mechanisms
should be devised to increase the participation of fathers. The recommen-
dations are as follows: 1. obligatory absence of the father from seven days
after the birth of the child, 2. “fathers’ quotas” as part of the leave for child
care, which only fathers could use and which cannot be transferred to the
mother. It is recommended that the quota be between 14 and 30 days.
A regional and local approach to enabling youth housing independence
is needed. The market (purchase and renting) of real estate is quite un-
regulated, and without the possibility of independence from parents,
young people are less likely to enter into partnership and marital wa-
ters, and more likely to delay family life, especially in urban areas..
It is necessary to harmonise all state and public policies which deal with
the issue of depopulation and support for the family. Strong inter-sec-
toral cooperation is a key precondition for harmonising priorities, goals
and activities. In formulating new measures, special attention should
be paid to the civil sector and parents’ associations. Communication
with the population should be clear, without contradictory messages.
When it comes to gender roles, it is evident that there is a gap between
expectations and practice with the spouses. A huge part of domestic
As one of the practical policy measures that can improve support to fam-
ilies and raise awareness of the importance of practical policies aimed at
families at all levels of society, we have prepared a series of dimensions
aimed at offering guidance for evaluating the work of institutions and
companies from the perspective of children, parents and families. They
serve to assess the extent to which these institutions are adapted to the
needs of families and, in that sense, represent one of the mechanisms
of population issues, i.e. the mechanism by which public policies and
practices seem responsive to family and demographic issues.
These dimensions are preliminary, and in order to fully be put to use, it is
necessary to p