s of delegation of national
or regional/Vojvodina government, which indirectly implies a gap between the fast and significant growth of Belgrade and Novi Sad as two government seats and the
decline of the rest of Serbia.
174 Three cities with the official status of a city and which are not district seats are Novi Pazar, Vršac and Loznica. Their significance is reflected in the fact that, within their
districts, they are in the spatial sense opposite to the district seat (i.e. Kraljevo, Pančevo and Šabac), so they have their areas of influence which extend to the surround-
ing smaller municipalities. This is an important element to be included in this research.
In Serbia, there are 24 medium-sized urban settlements which are the
seats of local self-government units171 with the status of a city (figure
1). They represent 14% of urban settlements in the country. Most of
these settlements have between 30,000 and 100,000 inhabitants.172
Medium-sized cities are the most important units of local self-gov-
ernment, and a local self-government unit has been the only essential
level of regional decentralisation of the state for decades (Vasiljević,
2007).173 For the first time since the last census in 2011, most of these
cities have been shrinking and this represents a new phenomenon in
depopulation in Serbia, which is no longer associated exclusively with
agricultural settlements, but also with settlements which are or were
previously industrial and service centres, i.e. urban-type settlements.
Medium-sized cities are particularly significant, as they represent a
key link between rural areas with small towns and larger cities of  in-
ternational and/or regional significance. Furthermore, the vast ma-
jority of these cities are also the seats of administrative districts174 as a
potentially important regional level for the (desired) decentralisation
of the state, as one of the important measures for better socio-eco-
nomic and, therefore, demographic balance within a broader area.
Therefore, it can be seen that these cities are the most important, if
not the only mean of the state’s spatial development which can con-
tribute to the balance between the four big cities registering growth
– Belgrade, Novi Sad, Niš and Kragujevac – and the rest of Serbia.
The time frame of the analysis is particularly related to changes with-
in the last inter-census period between 2002 and 2011. Where recent
data existed, they were included in the analysis.
183
C H A P T E R 8
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
There are officially 167 urban settlements in the Republic of Serbia,
which can be grouped into three sets according to their character. The
majority comprises 125 settlements or 74.9% of all urban settlements
in Serbia which are at the same time the seats of territorial administra-
tion units (municipalities and districts). The second set (20 or 12.0%)
are urban settlements which are the suburbs of larger settlements,
and the third set (22 or 13.2%) are other urban settlements, particular
in terms of their specific economy, usually mining and tourist settle-
ments. Such cities are called monostructural or mono-cities due to
their economic uniformity. The process of urban shrinkage points to
several key indicators:
In the 2011 census, 74.3% of urban settlements were depopulated
compared to the previous 2002 census. This is a significant deteri-
oration compared to the previous inter-census period (1991-2002),
when, for the first time since the Second World War, more than 10%
of cities were declining. An average city in Serbia had a 4.1% decline
in the 2002-2011 period. Borča had the highest growth (+ 31.1%),
while Divčibare registered the deepest decline (-40.0%). As many as
35 (21.0%) urban settlements had a large decline, over 10%.
The highest number of growing urban settlements were among the
suburbs with an urban settlement status – 65.0% of them recorded
growth. The third set o