strong out-migration
would not) in case of the high-fertility future than in the zero-migra-
tion scenario. The same comparison for the total dependency ratio
shows, though, that just 12 of 25 districts have lower values in 2100
in case of the high-fertility future due to the steady increase of the
young population. The lowest increase of the current ageing index
throughout the projection would be in districts strongly affected by
out-migration according to the zero-migration scenario. Contrary to
the high fertility scenario, only five districts would experience a lower
index than today in 2100.
3.3  Guidelines for policy makers
It is a well-known fact that the population in Serbia is declining and
that it is demographically old. Therefore, it is not surprising that one
of the basic messages of this chapter is that the total population of
Serbia will most likely drop by a fifth by 2050 or by two fifths by the
end of the century if no public policy measures in the field of demo-
graphic development are implemented.
Another more specific message indicates the multi-layered nature of
depopulation in our country: it is not only marked by low level of de-
mographic development, but also its pronounced spatial unevenness.
This is confirmed by the human development index, which in Serbia
is at the level of the index for Latin America and the Caribbean, if the
area of the capital is excluded, which is the only one similar to an EU
member state (Poland).
Here we come to the essential messages of the chapter, and that is
that depopulation in Serbia is, above all, a regional and subregional
issue. It is this aspect in dealing with demographic challenges that is
conspicuously neglected in the existing strategies and legal solutions.
In some regions and areas, the main demographic challenge is not de-
population or ageing itself, but the advancement of other dimensions
of human development, and vice versa. If this statement is taken into
account, policy makers could respond to the problem of depopulation
far more effectively than in the case of the usual approach based on
national averages. Even an unlikely future from today’s demographic
point of view, which assumes a fairly rapid birth rate close to simple
reproduction and its maintenance by the end of the century, would
not restore the current population at the national level, but only in
areas capable of attracting migrants.
Moreover, the gap in demographic and human development indica-
tors between the north and the south of the country is expected to
widen. The group of districts in the region of the South and East Ser-
bia would most probably lose between 40% and 50% of their pop-
ulation by 2050. If current trends in birth and survival rates contin-
ue (implying their slight improvements), 18 of 25 districts in Serbia
would lose more than a half of their population by 2100 despite the
expected transformation of the country’s migration profile from the
net emigration to a net immigration after 2030-35. The district of Bor
would even face the end of this century with no young population,
as is the case with some current settlements in that area. Even if the
high-fertility scenario of the ideally implemented policies aimed at
increasing birth numbers would come true, 12 of 25 districts would be
more than halved by 2100.
The hot topic of net emigration is much more relevant for specific are-
as than for the national level. In that sense, internal migration proved
to be a bigger challenge for a large majority of districts. Precisely, the
high-fertility scenario could have positive effects after a very long pe-
riod at the national level but at a high cost for most districts with low
human capital hit by steady out-migration. That being said, districts
whose centres are the largest cities in Serbia could maintain their
population size, and even increase significantly, even though they
would not reach the birth rates needed for generation replacement.
This also means that policies stimula