pment Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
5.2  Action: the bigger picture
The analysis of medium-sized cities in Serbia confirms the influence
of (1) deindustrialisation as a long-standing factor of urban shrinkage,
(2) lack of highly qualified jobs and (3) weak transport links and net-
Table 7. Recommended measures for stabilising shrinking cities
working as previously highlighted factors. Furthermore, it reaffirms
the importance of (4) higher education and (5) leisure content as im-
portant tools for the desired redevelopment of shrinking cities.
In contrast, some (unfavourable) features of the researched cities are
also identified, which are not sufficiently emphasised in the discourse
No.
SDG
Sets of measures - explanation
City – broader surroundings measures
M.01
C.10
C.16
Strengthening district seats: Greater administrative decentralisation or devolution of the state at the district level through
education and strengthening of district authorities in their seats. Decentralisation should be thereby implemented in jurisdic-
tions from economic and cultural fields, as critical ones for the stabilisation of local demographic circumstances, while the
measure of the de-concentration of government is more applicable for social and environmental fields. This approach enables
better accessibility of government, as well as the better balance of high-skilled places in the public sector across the country.
M.02
C.09
C.10
Intersectoral development centres:204 Central development institutions at the district level with sectors for incentivising,
strategic planning and proactive action in the field of integrated regional development. These centres would also include
technology parks or business incubators as systemic support to young professionals for launching start-up projects.
M.03
C.04
C.09
City thematisation: Encouraging the thematisation of cities based on their economic characteristics through the develop-
ment of higher education centres or research at the level of specialised and postdoctoral education, with a clear link to the
local economy.
M.04
M.09
Construction of high-speed roads205  towards larger cities in the area in order to create a branched traffic network, i.e. with-
out ‘blind directions’ with individual cities at the end of them.
M.05
M.16
Permeable borders: Opening of border crossing points in the parts of the state border where they are rare, and application
of measures for easier border crossing at the existing ones (integrated border crossing points, raising the importance of
crossings: regional traffic > international traffic).
M.06
C.11
C.17
Flagship projects: Development and construction of flagship projects, but only in cities with particularly valuable and unique
culture and heritage features, important for promoting the country and beyond.206
City – immediate surroundings measures
M.07
M.17
City alliances and networks: Incentivising regional associations and city networks based on special features (historic cities,
trade fair cities, industrial cities, etc.).
M.08
M.09
Transverse connections: Construction of rapid thoroughfares to cities in the immediate vicinity, especially those which are
transverse in relation to transport routes to larger cities, in order to establish and strengthen local networking.
M.09
M.05
M.17
Entrepreneurial associations: Support to local and district associations of small entrepreneurs for joint action on the market
and for the purposes of promotion
M.10
M.08
M.09
Mega-business zones: Development of strategically located and communally equipped business zones in cities with
above-average unemployment and low salaries and incomes.
M.11
M.07
M.10
Public transport: Regulation of suburban and intercity transport to the surrounding municipalities and smaller cities through
incentives and strengthening of the local network with the city as a clear hub (main transfer point).
Measures within urban area
M.12
M.08
M.09
Business-creative incubato