population
in the future. It is estimated that in 2018 alone, over 17 million people
changed their place of residence as a result of the destruction of the
natural habitat and human-built environment under the influence of
climate change (Pickup, 2019).
In this chapter, our goal is to shed light on a part of the complex set
of factors that affect the process of depopulation in Serbia. These are
environmental and climatic factors of depopulation. In that sense, we
will try to provide an answer to the question to what extent environ-
mental and climatic factors affect fertility, mortality and migration
as the basic components of the depopulation process in Serbia. At
the very beginning, it should be emphasized that this is a pioneering
endeavour, bearing in mind that environmental and climatic factors
have only recently become recognized as influencing socio-econom-
ic and demographic trends in the world, and that relevant data (es-
pecially for Serbia) are not available in many cases. Bearing in mind
the complexity of the phenomena in question - climate change and
environmental problems (ranging from air, water and soil pollution,
through illegal landfills, unplanned construction, lack of sanitary in-
frastructure, to threats to biodiversity and underdeveloped circular
economy, etc.), and the complexity of the depopulation process and
the impact of other factors on it (discussed in other chapters), as well
as due to the unavailability of data for Serbia, in this chapter it was
necessary to limit ourselves to examining the impact of two factors
- climate change and air pollution. In addition to the relative unavail-
ability of data, we singled out these two factors from the wide range
of other potential environmental impacts on the health, fertility and
migration of the Serbian population. In addition, although we con-
1  Introduction
207
C H A P T E R 9
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
2.1  Serbia and Climate Change
2.1.1	 Socio-political Context of Climate
Change in Serbia
Despite being a global problem, climate change has disproportion-
ately large impacts outside the Global North (Sabherwal & Kácha,
2021). Regarding climate change causes and consequences, post-so-
cialist countries, Serbia being one of them, belong to the “Global
East” meaning somewhere in between the North and the South (Mul-
ler, 2020). Socialist legacy and specific trajectory of post-socialist
development seems to matter in terms of mitigation and adaptation
to environmental and climate risks. For instance, the most important
infrastructure and the material environment were built during social-
ism, and then (re)constructed since the 1990s, alongside the struc-
tural transformations of the post-socialist societies (Ferenčuhova,
2020). The legacies of the state-socialist era, including environmen-
tal burdens from the past (e.g. from intensive industrialisation), en-
ergy-consuming and unsustainable infrastructures built before 1989,
seem highly relevant even 30 years after the collapse of state-social-
ism (Petrović & Backović, 2019; Pavlinek & Pickles, 2004). Moreo-
ver, the profit-oriented private developments (investor urbanism)
and mushrooming of the foreign owned high-polluting plants that
occurred in the post-socialist era, have created new environmental
problems in the region contributing the countries’ vulnerability to cli-
mate change and their capacity to adapt (Ferenčuhova, 2020; Petro-
vić & Backović, 2019; Filipović, 2021; Zeković et al., 2015).
The process of European integration, on the other hand, has an impor-
tant and mostly positive influence on environmental and climate poli-
cies in the region, especially among the countries that have already be-
came the EU members, but on the candidate countries as well (Braun,
2016; Borzel & Buzogany, 2019, Petrović, 2020). Taking into consider-
ation the general orientation of Serbia towards the EU integration and
harmonization