ods – the period of Communism, the 1990s period of wars and
the dissolution of former Yugoslavia, and the recent period in which
the healthcare system has not been adjusted to serve a much bigger
population of older people compared to the time of its establishing.
Serbia has yet to fully transition from high to low cardiovascular mor-
tality, which is currently very high even among middle-aged people
(Marinković, 2012). That makes this group of causes of death the main
contributor to avoidable mortality, while lung cancer is the single
biggest cause of death among all avoidable causes of death in Serbia
(Galjak, 2018). Areas of the country with high amenable and prevent-
able mortality, mostly pronounced in Eastern Serbia, coincide with
the areas distinguished by a higher share of older population, which
are typically rural, remote, and hilly, with poor infrastructure, thus
strongly affecting the timeliness of effective healthcare. Future gains
in tackling premature mortality will be achieved with further econom-
ic development. However, recent economic stagnation means that
catching up and converging with the most developed European coun-
tries will be difficult. Improving the quality of the healthcare system
and changing unhealthy habits in the general population does follow
economic growth, but much can be achieved with clever policy and
special programmes, especially in tackling the long-term problem of
preventable death (Rašević & Galjak, 2022; see Stamenković, 2021).
1.5  Steady out-migration abroad
and internal imbalance in migra-
tion flows
1.5.1	 International migration
Serbia is a typical emigration country18 with a negligible inflow of for-
eign nationals. The international migration balance essentially boils
down to the difference between emigrants and returnees, in both cas-
es, of Serbian nationals. A certain share of current returnees includes
retired ‘guest workers’ from the first big wave of emigration that be-
gan in the mid-1960s (Lukić, et al., 2013).
Even if the emigration stock of Serbian citizens or, in a broader sense,
Serbian diaspora is spread all over the world (Stanković, 2014; Bau-
ranov & Lin, 2021), the EU is by far the most important destination for
our nationals, particularly in recent period. Yet, estimates of the emi-
gration stock size vary greatly depending on definitions and research
methods but also on quality of data sources used. The last available
census of population (2011) captured only 313 thousand Serbian citi-
zens who were absent from the country for more than a year (Stank-
ović, 2014). On the other hand, the most recent alternative-type
16 Life expectancy at birth reflects the overall mortality level of a population. It summarises the mortality pattern that prevails across all age groups - children and adoles-
cents, adults and the older people. Average number of years that a new-born is expected to live if current mortality rates continue to apply.
17 Infant mortality rate is the probability of a child born in a specific year or period dying before reaching the age of one, if subject to age-specific mortality rates of that peri-
od. Infant mortality rate is a probability of death derived from a life table and expressed as rate per 1,000 live births.
18 The only recent period of intense immigration refers to the forced migration in the 1990s, when about 618 thousand people from the former Yugoslav republics, mostly ethnic
Serbs from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, found refuge in Serbia by 1996, of whom about 380 thousand settled down in the country by 2002 (Nikitović & Lukić, 2010).
59
C H A P T E R 2
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
estimate, based on the advanced analysis of social networks usage,
revealed that more than 850 thousand of Serbian ex-pats are spread
over 82 world countries in 2020 (Bauranov &Lin, 2021). This value
is much closer to the estimate by the United Nations, that points to
about