ons from Europe in the Late Nineteenth Century? Population and Development Review 20(3), 1-27.
61  Clemens, M.A., 2020. The emigration life cycle: How development shapes emigration from poor countries. IZA discussion paper, Bonn.
C H A P T E R 5
Dragica Pavlović Babić
Education and Depopulation
118
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Education is the principal tool of building human capabilities, finding
remunerative employment, and acquiring the competences necessary
for developing individuals and societies; three objectives that are not
automatically achieved once an education system is in place. Educa-
tion as a public service is organized for the full coverage of children
and youth, with the aim to equip them with competencies needed for
a socially and economically satisfying life. Therefore, education sys-
tems and changes in the society, such as demographic changes, are
interacting in complex ways: education systems have to adapt to de-
mographic changes (passively or proactively, creatively) but can also
influence them (compensate, prevent, direct or reverse trends).
The number of new-born children in Serbia has decreased from
78,101 in 2002 to 64,399 in 2019. This is almost 18% fewer new-borns
in just two decades.  The student cohort in primary and lower second-
ary school decreased by 29% from 2002. Cohorts in higher education
enrollment are also declining.  These trends certainly require that the
school system consolidates to adjust to smaller cohorts and reduces
spending in order to ensure a better targeted use of public resourc-
es. However, that is far from all – at the same time it has to enable a
profound increase in human capital development, create higher com-
petencies and higher professionalism of the teaching force. An aging
population requires more and better suited possibilities for lifelong
learning in order to maintain its productivity in new working contexts
– a requirement the education system has to respond to with adjust-
ing its provisions. The effectiveness of fertility increasing measures
can directly depend on the scope, distribution and quality of the early
In this chapter, we are addressing the two most often cited and most
visible areas in which education systems can and should adjust to de-
mographic changes: infrastructure (number of classes and schools)
and staffing. In both areas, appropriate adjustments create considera-
ble savings that can be reallocated to other, developmentally impor-
tant areas. Failing to embrace these changes increases inefficiencies
in the education system, and withholds necessary impetus for change
at the levels of quality, equity and relevance, etc. This, in turn, affects
the availability and quality of human resources in the country and
general wellbeing of the population.
The demographic changes in Serbia are not fully mitigated by con-
solidation of school infrastructure and staff. The student decline in
education system. The decreasing share of productive population re-
quires a new look on the education chances of each and every child,
better intake and catering of vulnerable groups, and elimination of
attrition, dropout, exclusion, segregation and all other barriers to the
development of each child’s maximum potentials.
The unfavorable demographic trends are projected to continue into
the future, and create particular challenges that have a range of im-
plications on the education system. Continued development of Ser-
bia’s human capital, in the face of ongoing demographic decline, will
require many new fine-tuned policies. In this chapter we discuss the
status, scope and effectiveness of these emergent policies. Firstly we
address the most apparent ways the school system in Serbia adjusts
to the decline of student population by consolidating infrastructure
and staff. Thereafter we look into several education policy areas par-
ticularly important for developing human capit