gration, 2021)
were inconsistently treated between the 2002 and 2011 censuses, from
a methodological viewpoint (Nikitović et al., 2015). It was one of the
reasons that limited our analysis of previous trends on internal migra-
tion to the period after the census 2011. However, those trends from the
past decades have induced strong sub(regional) differences in sex and
age composition of the current population, which will also have notable
implications in the future demographic trends. Directions and inten-
sity of internal migration are determined by regional and sub-region-
al differences, and especially the growing gap between major urban
centres and the rest of the country in terms of economic development,
diversification and supply of jobs, housing, health care, overall quali-
ty of life, but also subjective perception of opportunities to achieving
personal life goals. The fast-growing metropolitan area of Belgrade and
Novi Sad, the two largest cities in Serbia, represents the central focal
point of the country for internal migration inflows. Most other districts
in the country have been characterised by migration outflows for years,
especially those in the border and mountain areas of the South and
East Serbia region and the region of Šumadija and West Serbia. This
pattern of internal migration is deeply rooted in the previous periods,
but also intensified by the process of population shrinking and ageing
since the 1990s (Nikitović et al., 2015).
The average age of internal migrants in Serbia is almost 10 years lower
than the average age of the country’s total population (Lukić, 2022),
with the group of the 20-34-olds as traditionally the most mobile (Niki-
tović et al. 2015). For decades, women tend to change their residency
more often than men in general, and when it comes to longer distanc-
es, they are more prone to settling in the regional and district centres
(Nikitović et al. 2015). The main direction of internal migration flows
in the country – from the mountainous and hilly districts to those in
the lowlands, could also be labelled as the south to north migration. It
had been established already at the time of the foundation of the mod-
ern Serbian state two centuries ago but intensified during the period
of socialist Yugoslavia (1945–1991). In the beginning of this process,
the strongest migration outflows were from villages, particularly from
those in mountains, to nearby towns while in the recent period, when
demographic capacities of hinterland have subsided, the biggest out-
flows are from small- and middle-sized towns to the largest centres in
the country. Given the selectivity of migrants by sex and age, internal
migration in Serbia contributed to the further depopulation, gender
composition imbalance, declining and ageing of the workforce as well
as human capital loss in the hilly and border districts, and particularly
60
C H A P T E R 2
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
in their rural areas. The gender imbalance is specifically relevant for
the population of prime reproductive ages (20-39). As the process of
masculinisation of this age group has progressed across the country
in this century, especially in the former fast-growing towns, there are
more women than men in this age bracket only in the most populated
districts whose centres are the largest cities (Nikitović 2016a). Such a
spatial distribution could be a severe challenge to policies stimulating
higher birth numbers and in general to sustainable development of
most districts, especially the border ones, in the two southern regions
in Serbia. The long-term implications of the subregional differences
in the sex distribution of the population in the vital reproductive ages
can be fully perceived in the third section of this chapter presenting
population projections at district level up to 2100.
The most recent three-year average of the net migration rate (2018–
2020) according to 