atio of
total public expenditure for these purposes in 23 EU countries where
data are available stands at 1.2% of the GDP. Lower expenditure is
found mainly in new Member States (OECD, 2019b:239).
Looking ahead, the demand for LTC services in Serbia is expected to
rise, primarily owing to the growing population of the oldest-old and
increasing life expectancy with disability, heightened expectations,
shifting family patterns and declining family support due to inter
alia, emigration flows. Another important consideration is society’s
decision about the proportion of LTC that should be funded by clients
themselves, and the proportion funded – from public funds. Accord-
ing to OECD findings, social protection is essential for ensuring LTC
affordability and reducing old people’s risk of poverty (Oliveira & Lle-
na-Nozal, 2020:52).
3.2  Improving the existing system
3.2.1	 Development of community-based
services and deinstitutionalisation
In Serbia, community-based services are within the local gov-
ernment (LG) mandate. The most prevalent service is home care,
which, besides personal care, includes support for instrumental ac-
tivities of daily living. According to 2018 mapping data, this service
covered 1.24% of the persons 65+ in 123 LGs (out of 145), and total
expenditure for this purpose amounted to only 0.02% of the GDP
(Matković & Stranjaković, 2020). The proportion of old persons
and service provision intensity vary widely across LGs. Funding is
mainly provided from local budgets (approx. 2/3) and national ear-
marked transfers150 for social care services (1/4). In most LGs, no
co-payment is charged to beneficiaries. Despite the introduction
of earmarked transfers in 2016, home care services have not been
expanded. Local governments used the funds to decrease their own
investment in home care or to develop other services. Looking at a
longer time frame, this service developed vigorously in the first ten
years of transition or so, but no major progress in coverage or preva-
lence has been observed since 2012.
The coverage of older persons by residential care is also low in Serbia.
According to 2019 data, approximately 1% of the old were in residen-
tial care (Republički zavod za socijalnu zaštitu, 2020). Almost half of
the residents are in private care homes, whose capacities have record-
ed a steep rise in the past decade and whose services are entirely fund-
ed by clients. Residents and their families fund a significant portion
of public sector residential care services, too. According to 2018 data,
almost 40% of the residents needed the most intensive support, indi-
cating that, in Serbia, old-age care homes largely operate as nursing
homes and hospices (Republički zavod za socijalnu zaštitu, 2019:18).
Serbia’s public expenditure on institutional care is twice as high as that
on local-level social care services (Matković & Stranjaković, 2020).
In 18 EU countries for which data are available in the OECD data-
base, the proportion of persons aged 65+ in residential LTC facilities
(excluding hospitals) is significantly higher, 3.8% on average (OECD,
2021a). The deinstitutionalisation trend is especially strong in the
Nordic countries (Spasova et al., 2018:9).
Reforms in Serbia should indubitably support further development of
community-based services. Reform options include reviewing home
care standards to ensure appropriate service provision intensity in all
LGs throughout the year and uniform eligibility criteria, to enable
better targeting of people with the highest needs.151 Although co-pay-
ment is a matter of local policy, the system-wide arrangement where
beneficiaries pay for the support received in care homes indicates
that a higher level of co-payment for social care services within the
LG mandate makes sense, too. According to 2018 data, the co-pay-
ments covered only 5% of the total costs of the home care service in
Serbia (Matković and Stranjaković, 2020: 53).
Further reforms must also support the introduction 