Law on Prohibition of Discrimination, there are still no adequate
protection mechanisms. In job interviews, there are employers who ask
questions about family circumstances and plans, including those about
having a child (Đan, Vrbaški, 2019; Tomanović et al., 2016). A number of
women lose their jobs during pregnancy, especially women who are infor-
mally employed. Research also records cases of dismissal after the expi-
ration of parental leave, but also different strategies of leading a woman
to a hopeless situation so that she would quit her job (such as transferring
them to harder jobs or work in shifts) (Tomanović et al., 2016). The lower
the women’s education level and the more insecure the employment ar-
rangement with the employer, the higher the chance that they will expe-
rience some of these forms of discrimination at work. The scope of these
practices, due to their nature, cannot be clearly assessed, but awareness
of them is very present in public discourses.
2.3 Development of infrastructure
for raising children
The key mechanism of institutional support to parenting is the sys-
tem of preschool institutions. OECD country analyses show that
when the number of kindergartens and the number of children in
them is higher, the fertility rates are higher, too (Luci-Greulich and
Thevenon, 2013). Parents who have access to preschool institutions
do not have to choose between work and parenthood, they can more
easily balance private and working time, and they decide to have an-
other child more often. In Serbia, this support is part of the socialist
legacy, where the goal was full and full-time employment of women,
and socialisation of a part of the functions of raising a child. Although
it developed rapidly, this infrastructure never managed to meet all
the needs, and the situation is similar today, when we still note in-
sufficient coverage (share) of children in preschool institutions. In
2019, only 17% of children under the age of three went to a nursery
or kindergarten. Although the share of children in kindergartens has
increased in the last few years (Table 2), it is still significantly lower
than the European average of 36%. The coverage of children aged be-
tween 3 and 5 is slightly higher (61%). Although the share of children
of this age is lower than the European average, during the last decade
we have seen an increase in the number of children in kindergartens
(Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia and UNICEF, 2020).38
The coverage of children is characterised by significant territorial
differences. Among the regions, Belgrade stands out for significant-
36 Companies offer the following options: redistribution of working hours (41.1%), sliding working hours (23.7%) and work from home (11.2%). Financial institutions offer
the following: sliding working hours (52.2%), redistribution of working hours (13%) and work from home (17.4%), while local self-governments offer sliding working
hours (4.5%), redistribution of working hours (12.1%) and work from home (3%) (Đukić-Dejanović et al., 2018: 36). It should be borne in mind that the research did not
include the question of whether all workers have all these options at their disposal and how many of them actually use them, so the share of employees who have the
above options and the share of those who use these options is certainly (far) lower.
37 These studies were conducted before the pandemic, which led to a significant restructuring of the work sphere. Unfortunately, we still do not have enough data to give a
clear picture of the extent to which these changes will improve work-life balance and for which parents (by labour sector, level of education, region, etc.).
38  The share of children aged 3 to 5 was 50% in 2014 and 44% in 2010 (MICS4, MICS5, MICS6)
83
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
39 At the same time, there is a noticeable trend of greater inclusion of children i