 has been facing shrinking population for three decades, and,
during that period, demographic dynamics has drawn increasing at-
tention of the public and governments. Various measures to support
parenting have been in force for some time, from relatively long ma-
ternity leave and childcare leave to a network of public and private
preschool institutions, and a one-off parental benefit for the second,
the third and the fourth child was introduced in early 21st century.
This programme was later amended, so that today there is a generous
parental benefit for children up to the fourth one in order of birth,
which has been expanded by housing policies that make it easier for
young parents to buy an apartment or house.
Although lengthy and complex, these policies have been largely
aimed at encouraging births. In the last decade, in addition to pro-na-
tal measures, the attention of the public has been occupied by migra-
tion management issues. The growth of occasional and permanent
migrations to new and old European Union member states has con-
tributed to that, which has even led to a shortage of workers in certain
areas. The Strategy on Economic Migration adopted in 2020 tried to
offer an answer to some of the challenges. But, since the problem is
relatively new and very complex, and its roots go beyond the borders
of one country, the effects of these strategic documents have yet to
be seen.
So, in addition to the shortage of babies, now the lack of skilled labour
has drawn the public's attention to demographic issues. However, a
number of nuances to which this Human Development Report draws
attention have for now remained beyond the remit of the measures.
Among them are the following questions: is fertility affected by fac-
tors other than direct material benefits (for example, labour market,
public services, tax and urban and regional development policies,
etc.); can depopulation be delayed by prolonging life expectancy and
if so, what is the role of health policies, i.e. what should be done so that
people could live longer, bearing in mind that this is easier to achieve
than to raise the birth rate; what are the regional demographic ine-
qualities and what policies can delay them, etc. In other words, the
government has so far directed interventions in demographic issues
at the private domain, trying to influence decisions about whether or
not to give birth and whether or not to migrate. The private domain
truly is key to demographic outcomes, but this is also the space of very
narrow possibility to intervene. For greater impact, the government
could intervene in the much wider space of public policies and social
relations, such as issues of urban planning, labour market, education,
etc. These spaces hold much greater potential for impact. It is exact-
ly this step that the Human Development Report makes, showing how
demographic change is a development issue that requires a complex
and comprehensive response from society.
Each of the chapters of this Human Development Report offers anal-
yses and possible solutions in line with this general perspective. In
the paragraphs that follow, this large number of findings and ideas
are summarised as the ten basic messages of the Human Development
Report. They help shape this complex and comprehensive narrative of
demographic change, the factors that shape it, and possible courses
of action, so that it can become a new paradigm of public policies.
20
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
A large number of European countries, including Serbia, are facing
population decline (UN, 2019: 15). This process has been going on in
Serbia for three decades. The Statistical Office of the Republic Serbia
estimates that at the end of 2020, there were 6,871,547 inhabitants
in Serbia without Kosovo2. That is 315 thousand people fewer than in
2011, 626 thousand people fewer than in 2002 and as many as 965
thousand f