ban than in rural areas.
The number of children attending them is growing, but the percentages
are still below the European average. Due to the small number of places
available in them, children of employed parents have an advantage in
8  Message Six: Serbia’s Society Is Less
Family-Friendly Than It Believes
24
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
enrolment, which hinders the social integration of young unemployed
parents, primarily mothers (Pavlović Babić, 2022). Other policies are not
particularly family- and child-friendly: the tax system that does not in-
clude tax reliefs for families with children (Kostić, 2017), public and pri-
vate transport are not always adapted to the needs of women and fami-
lies (SeConS & Dornier, 2019), educational institutions shift much of the
burden of the educational process to parents (Vuković, 2017; Teodorović,
Bodroža and Stanković, 2015) etc.
The number of new-borns in Serbia has decreased by almost one fifth
in the last two decades, and the number of students by almost one
third. Our population is shrinking and ageing and, in these circum-
stances, educating every member of society becomes an even more
important task. If it wants to adapt to these demographic changes, the
educational system will have to become more efficient and equitable,
that is, more inclusive. From the point of view of society, the devel-
opment of good quality and inclusive education (as well as the labour
and health markets) is becoming a tool for both development and
population policies. Both indicators essentially show the ability of the
system to use all the human potentials of society, especially in the situ-
ation of demographic decline, and thus the decline of those potentials.
International measurements and domestic evaluations point to
chronic weaknesses of the Serbian educational system, but also to
some of its virtues. The school knowledge of Serbian students is typ-
ically at reproductive level, and the school is not doing enough for
their integration and functional application. The results of PISA tests
(performed by children aged 15) are below the average of OECD and
EU countries in three measured dimensions (reading, mathematics
and science). In that respect, Serbian students are one and a half
years behind their peers from the OECD countries. Significantly bet-
ter results have been achieved on the TIMSS test, which is conducted
in the fourth grade of primary school, and this difference could be
explained by more adequate support from teachers in lower school
grades (Pavlović Babić, 2022).
Education is still not inclusive, although significant progress has been
made in the last two decades. Some social groups, such as Roma and
So, although the Serbian society highly values family and parent-
hood, in many segments it is “hostile” towards the family and par-
ents. Public policies at the national and local levels are often not tai-
lored to the needs of families and children, while the labour market is
insensitive to these issues. Therefore, one of the priorities is the anal-
ysis of public policies from the perspective of population policy and
their adjustment to new demographic circumstances. Some form of
mainstreaming of this issue is inevitable for a society and state facing
such dramatic declines in population and human capital.
children from lower socio-economic backgrounds, constantly face
difficulties in education that come down to dropping out of the ed-
ucational process early. The learning process is shifting from school
to home, which is why parents are more involved in the learning pro-
cess, so the outcomes depend on their cultural and economic capi-
tal. Thus, children of parents who can assist them with learning or
pay for such assistance will have a better chance of achieving good
success (Teodorović, Bodroža and Stanković, 2015: 178). Education
in Serbia is expensive, especially for the lower so