irectly to human activity that alters the com-
position of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural
climate variability observed over comparable time periods”. Climate
change is induced by unsustainable human practices that are deeply
embedded in the existing political, social and economic systems that
are also environmentally unsustainable. Therefore, climate change is
natural but also a social phenomenon (Dunlap & Brulle, 2015).
Climate change negatively affects societies in many ways by aggravat-
ing existing social problems and creating new ones. Vulnerability of
a society to climate risks depends on a plethora of factors. Some of
the factors are environmental and geographical (e.g. coastal areas
are at greater risk of flooding than inland areas), but the majority of
them are social such as poverty, social inequalities, discrimination,
marginalization, unequal economic exchange, colonial legacy, une-
qual access to natural resources, etc. (Cannon, 2006). The harmful
consequences of climate change are not equally distributed in pop-
ulation, meaning they differ across social groups, intersecting with
other types of social inequalities (e.g. poverty, gender, race). Climate
change also asymmetrically affects different geo-political locations
(e.g. developed and developing countries) and types of economies
(e.g. economies based on the extraction of natural resources vs.
technologically hyperdeveloped) creating climate change winners
and losers (O’Brien and Leichenko, 2003). The literature on climate
change and security warns of a high probability of environmental
and climate change induced conflicts in the near future, both local-
ly and internationally (Alcamo et al., 2007; Barnett & Adger, 2007;
Puđak, 2019).
The response to climate change risks can be broadly categorized into
mitigation (preventive measures) and adaptation practices. Those ac-
tivities can be short-term or long-term; and they can be cursory and
unidimensional or comprehensive and aiming at multiple systemic
changes (Moser and Ekstrom, 2010). Developed countries are able
to invest in mitigation and adaptation strategies to prepare for future
risks, while developing countries usually invest in recovering from
the disasters that have already occurred (Puđak, 2019). While prepa-
ration for climate change in developed countries is mostly planned
and systematic, in developing countries the implementation of mit-
igation and adaptation mechanisms are usually sporadic, partial,
bound to the local level, and typically initiated as a reaction to some
catastrophic event (Mirza, 2003; Ford et al., 2011).
As the 2020 Human Development Report made clear, many inequal-
ities in human development have been increasing and continue to do
so, and climate change will only make them worse (UNDP, 2020). In
countries with high environmental threats, there is also greater social
vulnerability. Combined with other environmental factors (such as
air, water and soil pollution), climate change is most directly relat-
ed to the depopulation process. Pollution and climate change affect
the fertility, morbidity, mortality of the population, and have an ex-
tremely adverse effect on the overall quality of life inducing mass mi-
grations. Regarding the unfavourable effects on fertility (e.g. Deng et
al., 2016; Wu et al., 2017) the concept of reproductive environmental
justice has been introduced to emphasise that people living in pol-
luted areas and so-called “zones of environmental sacrifice” (e.g. vi-
cinity of mining sites, toxic industries etc.) are in an elevated risk of
subfertility and infertility due to the environmental factors (Lappe et
al., 2019). Additionally, a number of studies show significant impacts
of pollution and climate change on public health and mortality (Orru
at al., 2017). Finally, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) projections, ecological (climate) migrations
will be the most common form of spatial mobility of the 