 of access to services, labour and the econo-
my, wellbeing and inequalities. Population decline puts pressures on
social security systems, as fewer workers fund pensions, health care
and social security systems. As population decline goes hand in hand
with ageing, these challenges become greater, because the older pop-
ulation has more pensioners and has an increased need for health
care and social protection. Population decline and ageing can nega-
tively affect economic development, productivity growth and tech-
nological progress and investment in development and innovation.
These processes often go hand in hand with regional inequalities,
the growth of metropolitan areas and rural and small town decline.
Depopulation1 can jeopardise the basic functions of communities due
to a shortage of labour force, professionals or students, and affect re-
duced investment or the shutdown and relocation of businesses and
public institutions. When communities decline in this way, the overall
wellbeing of households and individuals declines and their future be-
comes uncertain (Coleman and Rowthorn, 2011; van Dalen and Hen-
kens, 2011; Beunen, Meijer and de Vries, 2020; Hospers and Reverda,
2014; Reher, 2007). In view of all these processes, this Human Devel-
opment Report views population decline not only as a demographic
and social change, but also as a challenge to development. It seeks
to initiate a comprehensive new framework for responding to demo-
graphic change in a way that unlocks new development opportunities
created by the demographic transition.
Human development is the process of enlarging the opportunities and choices that people face. The most critical of these choices are to
live a long and healthy life, to be educated and to have access to the resources we need for a decent standard of living, but also political
freedoms, human rights and personal self-esteem (UNDP, 1990: 1). Our freedoms and ability to choose depend on a number of social
factors, from politics and institutions, to culture and values. They depend on economic growth, which is not only an end in itself, but also
a means to achieve rich and fulfilling lives and exercising freedoms, as well as on social and economic living conditions, including access
to education and health care and political and civil rights (Sen, 2000: 3; Sen, 2003). In other words, human development depends on the
characteristics of societies, social and political institutions and economic orders which are based on people and which depend on people.
1 Throughout the report, the term “depopulation” is used as shorthand to denote the broader demographic transition of society. It primarily refers to a reduction in popula-
tion size, but often also encompasses qualitative changes such as aging, urbanisation, and regional demographic imbalances.
19
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
The population of Serbia will continue to shrink in the future. Raising the fertility rate cannot compensate for losses. The proximity of the
EU labour market and its needs for new labour will continue to be an incentive for out-migration. From the perspective of population size,
pro-natalist measures will not be sufficient. If it wants to mitigate population decline, Serbia will have to develop new migration manage-
ment policies, including immigration policies.
Institutional and political response to population decline
Issues of declining fertility were addressed by the Birth In-
centivising Strategies adopted in 2008 and 2018. In the early
2000s, demographic issues were within the remit of the Minis-
try of Labour. As demographic issues gained importance, first
in 2016 a minister without portfolio in charge of demographic
issues was appointed, and, in 2020, the Ministry of Family Care
and Demography was introduced.
2  Depopulation as a Social and Political Issue
3  Message One: Population Shrinking Is Inevitable
Serbia