th
degree recognition in Germany, the success rate is only two thirds,
pointing at the problems with the quality of health education in Ser-
bia. By 2017, there were 1,236 Serbian-trained physicians in Germany,
and by 2020 the number of health professionals surpassed 1,500.
Although these numbers are high and growing, and are undoubtedly a
reason for concern, they should be looked at in conjunction with the data
on the labour force in health sector residing in Serbia. The number of em-
ployed physicians was slightly below or around 30,000 in late 2010s, while
the number of unemployed physicians hovered above 2,000 and often
close to 3,000 for most of that period. The number of unemployed dropped
below 1,000 only after the Covid-19 outbreak. Similar trend was recorded
for nurses. In other words, up until 2020 emigration of health workers did
not interfere with the (excess) availability of health workforce at home.
It is also worth reminding that the number of Serbians migrating into
the EU for education reasons stagnated between 2,000 and 2,500
throughout the past decade, meaning the share of total first-time res-
idence permits issued for this reason steadily declined. Furthermore,
according to the UNESCO statistics, the total number of Serbian stu-
dents abroad was around 15,000 and was pretty stable over the 2013-
2018 period (Wiiw-ETF, 2021). For comparison, this number was
about the same as for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania, despite
Serbia having at least double the number of inhabitants.
The concept of brain drain implies that it is good if ‘best and bright-
est’ do not leave their home country, and few would oppose that.
However, if the brain drain is largely absent where it is expected, as
the data discussed in Section 4 suggest, what might it tell about the
Serbian labour market? If low- and medium-skilled workers are leav-
ing Serbia in proportionally larger numbers, why is this so?
Factors on demand (pull) side are important. There is a composition
effect at least, with the rapidly growing NMS destinations in need of
medium-VET skills. Gravity also helps, with countries pursuing high-
skill immigration policy being mostly situated faraway in overseas
destinations. The distance increases financial and psychological mi-
gration costs for potential high-skilled Serbian migrants. Still, since
the immigration rules in these ‘brain-importing’ countries did not
change significantly, apparently there have been other reasons slow-
ing down the inflow of Serbian immigrants there soon after 2000?
Some answers were already provided in previous sections, but here
we attempt to offer more explicit and coherent arguments. As already
mentioned, Serbia has its migrant diaspora spread almost all over
7 Labour Market Outcomes and Emigration
Behaviour
113
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
57  https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/human-capital
58 Benefit amounts in Austria and Germany are around 100 EUR per child, without limits to the number of eligible children.
the world, from Alaska to Australia, as the popular song line goes.
Thus the question of migrant selectivity – that is, who would leave the
country and who wouldn’t, as well as the destination selectivity – that
is, where will those who leave go, should be better answered by turn-
ing to the supply (push) side, which appears to be more interesting
and salient for this type of analysis.
The Roy model applied to migration analysis is a particularly useful
framework (Roy, 1951). It implies that the selectivity of migrants and
their sorting across destinations depends on cross-country differences
in the returns to education. Simply put, if a sending country has a low-
er income inequality, compressed wage distribution and low returns to
education (all highly but not deterministically correlated), the emigra-
tion rates for high-skilled will be higher than for low-skilled workers,
and vice