ned and well-supported, mon-
itored and evaluated interventions. The interventions should encom-
pass all segments of continued professional development, including
initial teacher education, licensing, mentoring, and blended learning
courses with digital teamwork, contextualized learning tasks and
whole school engagement.
4.2.3	 Use of digital technology for
teaching and learning
The COVID-19 emergency situation distance education painfully
witnessed how moving from contact instruction to distance educa-
tion is not simply “moving” learning from one place to another. In
order to produce quality learning outcomes, distance education
requires not only technical readiness in terms of equipment and
skills, but also curriculum readiness (i.e. appropriate digital content
prepared for teachers and ready to use), pedagogical readiness (i.e.
Figure 20. PISA 2018 data on the possibility of home/based learning for Western Balkans countries and territories89
Source: OECD, 2021
% of students in schools whose principal agreed od strongly agreed with the following statements:
WB6 average
An eﬀective online learning support
platform is available
The number of digital devices for
instruction is suﬃcent
Teachers have the necessary technical
and pedagogical skills to integrate
digital devices in instruction
ALB
BIH
KOSa
MNE
MKD
SRB
ALB
BIH
KOSa
MNE
MKD
SRB
ALB
BIH
KOSa
MNE
MKD
SRB
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
OECD average
a References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
89 OECD. (2021). The COVID-19 crisis in the Western Balkans Economic impact, policy solutions and short-term sustainable solutions. https://www.oecd.org/south-east-
europe/COVID-19-Crisis-Response-Western-Balkans.pdf
135
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
mastering a wide range of digital interactive pedagogical tools) and
assessment readiness (using assessment formats that maximize
students initiative and exploration of digitally available knowledge)
(ZUOV, 2021). Without fully observing these four types of readiness,
distance education easily runs a great risk of becoming monotone
and boring – and of being an undue burden on students; it requires
higher motivation and self-regulation. Research shows that student
motivation and student self-regulation become critical aspects of dis-
tance education worldwide.90
Appraisals of the possible worldwide impact of COVID-19 related
school lockdown are predicting learning losses of various propor-
tions, depending on various factors. The length of school closure and
preparedness of the education system for switching to digital educa-
tion are major determinants of learning losses. The loss is expected
to correspond to 0.3-0.9 years of a usual year’s schooling attainment,
or a high percentage of the yearly learning gain (63-68% in reading
and 37-50% in maths), or even 1.5 years’ worth of learning, if taken
cumulatively.91 The reduced learning time during a school day can be
another loss factor (Garcia & Weiss, 2020).
Empirical research on the impact of the COVID-19 crises on learning
performance in the Western Balkans is not yet available. Therefore, it
is imperative to use the current academic year to conduct standardized
learning assessments in order to assess the impact and design appro-
priate remedial measures. However, predictions for the Western Bal-
kan countries based on PISA 2018 data (Figure 20) on the possibility
of home-based instruction, indicate towards the prospect of more pro-
nounced learning losses than are found in highly developed countries.
It is expected that the PISA score might drop by 16 points, and that the
percentage of students below basic proficiency in reading may increase
from the current 53% to 61%, which would have a drastic negative im-
pact on human resource development (WB, 2021).92
4.3  Designated education
financing
A decrease in the student population co