s and territories,
with a score of 38 out of 100, and was placed in the company of Brazil,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Peru, Shri Lanka, Suriname and Tanzania, far
below OECD countries, as well as those in the region, except Koso-
vo95, Bosnia and Herzegovina and North Macedonia96.
93 According to the DevInfo database in 2018 3.1%, i.e. 3.7% according to new the Strategy of Education Development 2030.
94 Available at: http://liste.mpn.gov.rs/tehnoloski_viskovi_15.11.2021.xlsx
95 References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
96 See: https://www.transparency.org/en/countries/serbia”
137
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
The education system in Serbia has been part of several integrity as-
sessments. Since the first review of the education system’s integrity,
conducted by the OECD in 2011 (OECD, 2012) and followed by a re-
view by the Council of Europe in 2017 (CoE, 2017), several national
reports (BCPB, 2018), and the latest report conducted for the EU pro-
ject The fight against corruption97 certain areas of major corruption
risk in education have been continuously highlighted. One area of
concern is the functioning of the municipal-level education inspec-
tion, which is understaffed, undertrained, and dependent on the LSG
management at the local level. Conflict of interest is also a major con-
cern and the system can be easily influenced by different stakeholder
interests. The lack of a trustworthy law enforcement mechanism is
often coined (cesto prati sprovodjenje politike)to the implementation
of policies relating to human resources (hiring/firing of teachers, ap-
pointing of principals, etc.), and has direct effects in terms of eroding
the quality of the education delivered in schools. Public procurement
and renting out of school facilities is another area of concern. Cash
flows are not fully transparent at local level and it is hard to moni-
tor the spending of funds allocated for education institutions, sup-
port to students or professional development of teachers. Untimely
assessment of learning outcomes, private tutoring, illicit entry into
preschool or higher education levels, preferred school or educational
profile are commonly found in the assessments.
The total capacity of the education system to identify and prevent
corruption risks is also found to be insufficient (OECD, 2012). The de-
lay in implementing the information system in education leaves the
education system without a critical tool for overall monitoring, but
also for identifying corruption risks.
4.5  Conclusions  and main points
The education system in Serbia, as it is now, is not equipped to ad-
dress the complex nested problems entailed in the depopulation pro-
cesses in the country. Education is not furnishing young generations
with competencies well enough even for the current needs of the
economy and active social life, and certainly cannot respond to the
increased needs of boosting human capital.
Serbia is falling behind OECD countries on PISA, teaching and learn-
ing is not vibrant and innovative, and the education system is trou-
bled by the influx of numerous integrity problems. The education and
training system is failing to provide attractive and relevant opportu-
nities and motivation for upskilling and further education for the in-
creasing body of adult and older population, whereby disabling the
economy with a growing number of employees who do not possess
the required skills. Early and preschool education is still underdevel-
oped and leaves approximately one third of children without appro-
priate support for a successful start in school. The schools and the
system in Serbia are not ensuring that every child has the chance of
developing, learning, and entering into a profession that will ensure
his/her decent employment and income, and are, thereby, contrib-
uting to the perpetuation of poverty cyc