Asia had no formal schooling at all (the red area in Figure
8), it is remarkable that today more than half have secondary school
education (meaning they have completed at least junior secondary
schooling) or higher education.
Africa’s population is still likely to more than double, from its current
1.3B to around 2.8B by 2075. But in Africa today, still a third of the
entire adult population has no formal education at all, and the pro-
portion with post-secondary education is marginal. In the theoretical
case of current trends continuing for the next decades, Africa would
take decades to catch up with where Asia is today in terms of educa-
tion levels, and only by the end of the time horizon in 2075 would its
education levels be comparable to those of Eastern Europe today. Ge-
opolitical changes will depend heavily on the human capital and asso-
ciated economic performance of countries and world regions. In this
respect, education-specific population projections reveal a relatively
advantageous position for highly developed countries compared to
the future that trends in future population size alone may imply when
viewed in isolation.
8  Comprehensive Policy Responses:
Strengthening the National Human
Resource Base
While during the second half of the 20th century (at least up through
1994) the dominant population policy paradigm, also supported by
strong donor agencies, focused on curbing rapid population growth
in developing countries through family planning. There were also
dissenting voices to this paradigm, mostly from socialist countries
at the time, that pointed at the importance of population growth for
social and economic development. In the 1980s, the view that popu-
lation was a neutral factor with respect to development also became
a popular belief. The beginning of the new century has seen increas-
ing differentiation, if not confusion, about the goal of the population
policies and the appropriate instruments for pursuing them. While
before 1994, fears relating to population growth in developing coun-
tries dominated discussions in international fora, some forms of
pro-natalism have always existed and shaped the policies of certain
countries, though they had distinctly specific national perspectives.
The 1994 International Conference on Population and Development
(“ICPD”) in Cairo codified a major shift away from demographic tar-
gets to a focus on individual reproductive and human rights. While
important from a human rights perspective, this shift also resulted in
generally less attention given to aggregate population-level consid-
erations. There now remains a vacuum with respect to population
policies addressing populations in the proper meaning of the word,
as aggregates of people whose changing size and composition is con-
sequential for the well-being of individuals and societies alike.
Today, governments of an increasing number of countries, whose low
fertility levels and rapidly ageing populations cause serious concern,
are actively searching for policy interventions that are both effective
at the population level and socially acceptable at the individual lev-
el. This issue is exacerbated in countries like Serbia that experience
significant out-migration and thus lose people and their skills to oth-
er countries that pay higher wages. It is this combination of negative
natural growth (the balance of births and deaths) and significant
51
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
out-migration that makes depopulation a hot issue of highest policy
concern in the countries affected by these phenomena.
What would be an appropriate population policy paradigm that could
effectively address these concerns of depopulation and at the same
time also be applicable more broadly to other countries that are still
in earlier phases of their demographic transitions? In an article enti-
tled “A Population Policy Rationale for the Twenty-First Cent