sons, while
the welfare state faces challenges of caring for an increasing number
of old people (Taylor-Gooby, 2004; Bonoli, 2005).
In the Serbian context, ageing poses the greatest pressure, both on
the social and pension insurance system, and on long-term care and
health care. Ageing is a key demographic characteristic of Serbia at
the beginning of the 21st century (Matković, 2022). However, Serbia
is not among top-ranking European countries in terms of the share of
people aged 65+, and especially those aged 80+. This is due to the low
life expectancy of 65-year-olds, which has been stagnant for decades
and amounts to 16.2 years, which is four years less than the EU aver-
age. According to the World Health Organization data, the health-ad-
justed life expectancy at birth for men in Serbia in 2019 is between 8
and 10 years below the total life expectancy.
This Human Development Report opens a series of questions to
which we, as a society, will have to give answers in the coming years.
It appears that major systemic changes in the pension system are not
necessary, but additional research and public dialogue on parametric
changes are needed, such as changing the indexation formula, mov-
ing the retirement age in line with the extension of the life expectan-
cy, early retirement, reviewing eligibility for subsidised pensions and
encouraging later retirement (Matković, 20212).
Population ageing exerts new pressures on the system of long-term
care and health care, since ageing not only prolongs healthy life years,
but also the years with health problems and disabilities. That is why
this Report proposes to consider changes in the system of long-term
care, which range from the establishment of a government institu-
tion for long-term care, to the development of community services
for older people. Although the system of social protection, and espe-
cially the system of local community services, is largely adapted to
the needs of older people (Vuković, 2017; MRZBSP, 2020), due to the
growing number of older people, changes are needed both at the lev-
el of services themselves (more home assistance services, establish-
ment of day care and supported housing) and at the system level (for
example, a review of earmarked transfers) (Matković, 2022).
Older people (65+) are not significantly poorer than the general pop-
ulation or are even in a slightly more favourable position, but those
older than 75 are significantly more vulnerable. Older persons who
have not exercised their right to a pension (approximately 136 thou-
sand people) are in a particularly unfavourable position. Given the
prevalence of women among those aged 75+ and especially among
those who do not exercise the right to a pension, the introduction of a
state-subsidised pension is also becoming an important gender issue.
With this in mind, the Human Development Report considers two op-
tions for the introduction of state-subsidised pensions, in the form of
a guaranteed minimum income for older people and in the form of a
special module within the cash benefits programme.
Demographic change affects the welfare state due to increased demand for services and benefits and fewer workers financing the sys-
tem. A key aspect of this change is population ageing. The whole society, as well as public policies must adapt to new demographic
circumstances. This includes adjusting the pension system, developing preventive health care, and social protection and long-term care
for older people, as well as changes in the labour market, infrastructure, housing etc.
27
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
12	Message Ten: Poor Health Outcomes Are a
Demographic and a Developmental Challenge
The health of every inhabitant of Serbia becomes all the more impor-
tant if their number decreases. Improving the health of the popula-
tion can slow down depopulation and make the smaller population
not only live lo