nger, but also be more productive and place less social
and economic expenses on society. Thus, the health of a small popu-
lation can become its development resource.
Socio-economic status and the quality of health care have a special im-
pact on the health of the population. Low socio-economic status, and
that means low education and material standard of living, affects the
prevalence of unhealthy lifestyles and lower health literacy, which later
translates into higher health risks. This Human Development Report
illustrates the widespread unhealthy lifestyles that later lead to the
emergence of chronic non-communicable diseases and high morbidity
and mortality rates. Many of these diseases, such as cardiovascular dis-
eases and lung cancer, are the most common causes of death and can
be avoided through appropriate prevention (Stamenković, 2022).
Caring for the demographic future implies more intensive early care
for public health and the promotion of healthy lifestyles much more
intensively than is the case today. Therefore, it is necessary to intro-
duce new and improve existing preventive health activities aimed at
healthy people and youth, which would include, in addition to the
health care system, other social actors (for example, schools and
companies). This would reduce health expenditures, both private and
public, and improve outcomes. In addition, the Report demonstrates
how innovative solutions, from more flexible and available health care
and telemedicine, to prevention in schools and the labour market, can
lead to better and more equitably distributed health outcomes. A key
role in this should be played by a health system that is more efficient,
equitable and adapted to new demographic circumstances.
One of the biggest shortcomings of the public health system is the in-
sufficient availability of health care services, which is a consequence
of low public health expenditures. This leads to high private health
care expenditures (as much as 42%). Patients turn to the private
health sector to avoid long waiting times and complicated procedures
in the public sector, but also when they buy medical devices that the
public sector is unable to provide. Private health services, as well as
health services in general, are more often used by citizens of higher
socio-economic status (Boričić et al., 2014: 61-64). Roma and oth-
er citizens of lower socio-economic status have no alternative to a
slow and inefficient public system. This is one of the factors of poor
health of the population of Serbia and high mortality rates. There-
fore, changes in the health care and social protection system that are
adapted to the needs of all social strata, including the lower strata and
the poor, would improve health outcomes, reduce mortality and in-
crease the odds for all citizens to better integrate into society, from
education through work to political and public life.
In addition to poverty, low health culture, and the unavailability of
health care, other factors also contribute to poor health outcomes.
One of them is the subject of the analysis in this Report – environment
pollution. It is estimated that due to excessive air pollution, between
6,000 and 16,000 people die prematurely in Serbia every year (Pet-
rović, 2022). That means that the population of a smaller town disap-
pears every year. If only the existing laws were to be applied, 2,400
lives would be spared annually and large funds spent on health care
would be saved. In addition to direct health costs, high pollution also
produces a decline in the productivity of people and communities, as
well as other indirect losses.
Broader policies also have an impact on the better health of the pop-
ulation. Among them, education, labour market policies and redis-
tributive measures to reduce poverty and social inequalities have a
special place. More educated and richer people can lead a healthy life,
eat healthily, avoid alcohol and cigarettes, and live healthier thanks to
that. In t