27.84 and fe-
male 20.88 per 100,000 residents) (Eurostat, 2021). These values are
not surprising given the fact that diabetes in Serbia is often discov-
ered by chance, when the disease has progressed and complications
have occurred. Almost a third of patients already have one or more
late complications at the time of the diabetes diagnosis being made
(IJZ, 2021). Although diabetes depends on genetic factors, a healthy
balanced diet and physical activity can contribute to maintaining op-
timal blood sugar levels.
Preventive check-ups are important in order to identify health prob-
lems at an early stage, enable more efficient treatment and reduce
overall health care costs. Measuring blood pressure, measuring blood
sugar or cholesterol levels and their deviations from reference values
may be the earliest indicators of cardiovascular disease or diabetes.
Also, adhering to the recommendation for mandatory screenings that
exist in Serbia (for breast cancer, cervical and colon cancer), and in-
creasing the coverage of the target population with national screen-
ing programmes is crucial in order to reduce the number of deaths
from certain types of cancers.
The main characteristics of the population in the Republic of Serbia
are maintaining the low birth rate trend and aging population, with
an increase in general mortality rates. These changes have brought
the population to the threshold of demographic age. As life expectan-
cy increases at birth, so does the number and share of older people in
the population, or people over 65. While the share of older persons in
2002 was 16.6%, in 2011 it increased to 17.3%, while in 2020 it reached
one fifth of the total population (21.1%). Projections predict an in-
crease in the number of older persons in the future, as well as their
even higher share in the total population, to as much as 24.1% (SORS,
2022; Nikitovic, 2021).
Age is one of the factors that contribute the most to low health lit-
eracy (Cutilli, 2007). There are several different age-related changes
that could contribute to reduced health literacy in older people such
as reduced cognitive ability that impairs an elderly person’s ability to
understand or recall new topics (Cornett, 2006; Kintsch, 1998). Phys-
ical impairments such as hearing and vision loss may also contribute
to reduced ability to process health information (Cornett, 2006; Sper-
os, 2009). Unfortunately, as the gap in physical and cognitive abili-
ties between the younger generation and elderly adults widens, it can
lead to feelings of shame and embarrassment that reduce effective
communication channels and further complicate the health literacy
of elderly adults (Cornett, 2006; Speros, 2009). Lack of knowledge
and/or skills related to health can serve as an obstacle to engaging
in healthy behaviour, prevention services, and management of acute
and chronic diseases (Chesser et al., 2016).
As the number of elderly people in the population increases, so does
the risk of developing chronic non-communicable diseases. Data
show that 34 million deaths worldwide are attributed to chronically
non-communicable diseases each year, with three-quarters of them
being those of persons over the age of 60 (Jones, 2016). With the
increase in the number of elderly people, the pressure on the health
care system is growing, as well as the treatment costs of elderly peo-
ple for whom chronic non-communicable diseases are the primary
reason for using health care services (Boutayeb et al., 2005).
In Serbia, the share of people with a chronic disease under the age of
65 is at the level of 20.6%, while over four fifths of the elderly (85.7%)
have a long-term illness or health problem, which is an increase com-
pared to 2013. The most common chronic disease among older per-
sons is hypertension, i.e. high blood pressure, which is present among
63.8% of the older population. This is the most common disease in
other European countries among the population aged 65 and over.
The value of th