t stocks
and flows
Most discussions on migration start with numbers. Producing reliable
numbers, however, is an extremely complex task; understanding and
interpreting these numbers is often even more difficult. Definitions,
concepts and administrative and survey practices related to migrant
stocks and flows vary across countries in ways that make full inter-
national harmonization impossible. Because we live in the world of
sovereign states, it is easier for a country to account for immigrants
residing within its borders than for own current or former citizens
beyond its reach. Thus, sending countries face more difficulties in
tracking their emigrants than destination countries in counting their
immigrants. To make things worse, statistical capacity in typically low
or middle income emigration countries is lower than in high income
countries where most immigrants go.  For these reasons, the best strat-
egy for an emigration country is to collect data on its own emigrants
from the immigration statistics of destination countries. Unfortu-
nately, due to historical factors and its geographical position, Serbia
is among the countries with the highest dispersion of its emigrants,
which complicates the task of assembling the data from all important
destination countries.
Countries use different concepts, definitions and data collection meth-
odologies to compile statistics on migration flows. Definitions of who
counts as an international migrant vary over time in the same country
and across countries. The United Nations Recommendations on Sta-
tistics of International Migration defines an ‘international migrants’ as
any person who has changed his or her country of usual residence (UN
DESA, 2012), distinguishing between ‘short-term migrants’ (those
who have changed their countries of usual residence for at least three
months, but less than one year) and ‘long-term migrants’ (those who
have done so for at least one year). However, some countries use dif-
ferent criteria to identify international migrants. Differences in con-
cepts and definitions, as well as data collection methodologies, hinder
full international comparability. An implicit assumption is that they do
not systematically change over time.
2  Migration Trends
51 UN DESA (Odeljenje Ujedinjenih nacija za ekonomska i socijalna pitanja), 2012.
This dominantly alarmist tone has also significantly influenced the
government’s policies toward migration. Catastrophic discourse
eventually translates into policy thinking that something radical has
to be done fast, before it is too late. For example, in 2019 first draft
version of Strategy on economic migration (adopted eventually in
2020 as a more balanced document) focused almost entirely on ways
to prevent and revert the brain drain – without really establishing
the facts on its size and characteristics. In late 2019, even before the
adoption of the Strategy, specific measures were legislated providing
very generous tax reductions for high-skilled high-earning returnees.
In the same fashion, a new measure of waiving the payment of Annu-
al Personal Income Tax (levied at very modest rates on some 1% of
top income earners) for those under the age of 40 was marketed as a
brain drain prevention measure.
Most of the pieces of migration diagnostics floating in the public
sphere are superficial and often misleading. This does not mean that
there is no reason to worry about emigration. But it is important to get
the facts right, and as one digs more into migration statistics, murky
and incomplete as it is, a more ambiguous and extremely complex
picture gradually emerges. This chapter in the first place attempts to
make sense of the data.
We focus on the analysis of emigrant stocks and (gross) outflows from
Serbia, with the descriptive quantitative analysis covering primarily Eu-
ropean destination countries for which there is available harmonized
Eurostat statistics. They comprise at least two thirds of total Serbian
emigration and are b