 confirm the unequal distribution of
household tasks, showing that household duties and daily childcare
responsibilities are primarily women’s responsibilities.
Slightly more than it is the case with household tasks, men are willing
to engage in interactive activities with their children, such as playing,
walking, and the like. More than a third of fathers are involved in al-
most all observed activities relevant to the child’s early development
Chart 6. The degree of involvement of parents in daily activities around
the child aged 1-5
Source: MICS6, author’s calculations
Fathers
Mothers
Prepared food for
or with the child
Cleaned the room for
or with the child
Engaged in one or two
household activities
16
97
13
97
20
99
(Charts 7 and 8). Fathers more often take the child outside and play
and participate in activities that involve “easier” interaction, while
less often they dedicate themselves to activities of reading, telling
stories, singing or drawing, or designed and goal-oriented activi-
ties. As a child grows up, the number of activities involving fathers
and mothers grows, albeit more for mothers than for fathers, which
means that the gap between spouses grows over the years.
Men are more often involved in parental responsibilities if their wives
are employed, if they have their own income, when they are highly
educated, and if they live within the nuclear family (without direct
kinship support) (Stanojević, 2018). Men are more involved also when
spouses rate their relationship very highly. Unlike the division of do-
mestic chores, the division of parental responsibilities is influenced
by the resources of the wife, value orientations, and the degree of
satisfaction with the relationship. Although men are to some extent
Chart 7. Degree of parental involvement in children’s developmental activities, age 1-2
Source: MICS6, author’s calculations
Percentage of children (age 1-2) with whom parents have engaged in
four or more
activities
Mean number
of activities
reading books
or looking at
picture books
telling stories
taking a child
outside the
house
playing with
the child
singing songs
spending time
with the child
in naming,
counting or
drawing
objects
2,4
4,3
35
74
34
68
35
70
57
78
57
78
31
71
28
64
88
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
involved in parental responsibilities, only a small number of them are
ready to fully equate themselves with their wives. Champions of new
models of involved parenting (new fatherhood) are men with higher
education, men coming from urban zones and those who believe that
there should not be differences between men and women in public
and domestic spheres.
The above shows us that modernisation changes within the private
sphere first occur at the level of parenting practices, so that men are
involved to a greater extent in child care and only then in other do-
We have already stated that more economically developed Europe-
an societies, have higher fertility rates and that until recently they
recorded a certain surge in fertility. One dimension that explains
inter-societal differences and (potential) positive trends relates to
the domination of egalitarian gender value orientations (Arpino, et
al, 2015, Baizan et al, 2016). The relationship between value orien-
tations and fertile behaviour has historically taken the form of the
U curve (Esping-Andersen & Billari, 2012; Arpino et al., 2015; Lap-
pegård et al. 2021).
In traditional societies, there is a clear separation of gender spheres
and dominance of patriarchal values, all accompanied by high fer-
tility rates. The changes will start with the entry of women into the
mestic responsibilities.  The involvement of men in parenting legiti-
mises their presence in the private sphere, and sets new standards of
involvement before new generations, not only in parenting but also
in other household responsibilities.46 However, the attempt of men to
enter the privat