rmal labour market, should be a
priority. However, there are some obstacles along the way.
The Serbian labour market is dual and consists of (1) better qual-
ity jobs in the public sector and large private companies and (2)
poorer jobs in the small private businesses (Aleksić, Arandarenko
and Ognjanov, 2021). This market is characterised by high differ-
ences in income relative to the education level, so the salaries of
workers with higher education are increasing compared to work-
ers with secondary and lower education. The rise in the salaries in
the public sector, which employs a significant percentage of work-
ers with higher education, also contributes to this growth. On the
other hand, low-skilled workers have not only lower wages, but
also more precarious jobs with poorer labour protection. These
features of the labour market not only make migration desirable,
but also prevent the full social integration of all workers.
The incomes of the lower socio-economic strata have also been
affected by the social benefits reform. Material social assis-
tance is granted to a small number of the poorest families and
its amount is low (only families with four children receive the
amount of financial social assistance that reaches the amount of
one minimum wage, VRS, 2018b: 199). The criteria for granting
child benefits are also restrictive, so a family of four loses the
right if they have an income one-fifth higher than the minimum
wage (Arandarenko, 2022), and the amounts are low. These poli-
cies affect the poorest people in Serbia, discouraging them from
the formal labour market and further encouraging them to mi-
grate to countries that offer better wages, higher material benefits
and better services.
The position of young people in the labour market, especially
those with lower and secondary education, is very bad. Their first
jobs are of poor quality, with low wages and unfavourable working
conditions, very often in the informal labour market. In addition
to the characteristics of the labour market, a string of policies
such as education (Vuković, 2017), housing (SIPRU, 2021), tax
and labour market policies (Aleksić, Arandarenko and Ognjanov,
2021), aggravate the position of young people and their integra-
tion into society. This is especially true for young people from
lower socio-economic strata, those who migrate and those who
should be the bearers of positive demographic change. If it wants
to use the potential of all its inhabitants and offer some of them a
sustainable alternative to leaving, our society will have to devel-
op inclusive economic and labour market policies. Among them
are intergenerational solidarity and youth employment support
policies, raising the quality of jobs offered, inclusive policies, like
activation and employment support policies, etc.
26
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
11	Message Nine: Benefiting from Older
People’s Human Capital Will Be a Great Test of
Adaptability for Society
One of the most important transformations of the 21st century will be
population ageing. It is the result of people living longer lives, and the
rising share of older persons in the population can present many long-
term development opportunities globally as well as locally. For these
benefits to materialise, however, numerous adjustments will have to
be made to enable the full economic and social integration of older
persons – including investing in the human capital of future older gen-
erations, as advised throughout this report.
But depopulation will also deepen or intensify new and old social risks
and place new demands on the welfare state. New social risks are
a consequence of changes in society, such as ageing and the transi-
tion from an industrial to a post-industrial economy, which rendered
some occupations and skills irrelevant. Families may also have diffi-
culty balancing work, parenting and caring for older per