les and to erosion of human
capital in Serbia.
The education system, although influenced by emergency distance
education, and fairly equipped with information and communication
technologies,, connectivity and education opportunities for the gift-
ed students, has not yet fully embraced digitalization in education as
a comprehensive cross-curricular developmental focus, and is losing
time  instead of helping the country to  catch up with the international
digital agendas in ways that could partially compensate for the de-
clining human capital.  The Serbian education system is not utilizing
the readily available levers and resources that could help the system
in achieving better results. In general terms, Serbia has a neglected,
pauperized and disregarded teaching force that will not be able to
carry out major developments needed for boosting human capital
in the country, unless its financial, social and educational status is
swiftly improved. The financing of education is not sufficient even
for the current education situation, let alone for supporting the vig-
orous changes needed in education in order to help the country cope
with depopulation and human capital losses – overall financing is
low, the distribution of running costs is unreasonable, and innovative
schemes are blocked. Serbia has not manage to handle the consoli-
dations in education infrastructure and staffing in a constructive way
which would ensure better funding for quality and equity develop-
ment. Finally, schools and preschools are not attractive places which
would provide young parents with their children developing values,
knowledge and skills, staying safe and happy, while the parents are
working.
Education systems are huge and very resilient to change, and edu-
cation goals are usually considered an objective to be reached in 10
to 20 years’ time. Among other reasons, that is why education some-
times fails in achieving a priority status in national development
policies, and, as a consequence, contributes to countries failing in
their long-term development. Education systems are also complex,
interdependent systems of divers stakeholders, involving multi-layer
legal, administrative, human resources and institutional structures,
all in theory focused on facilitating such fragile processes as human
learning, development and wellbeing, but can easily drift away from
their original purpose. Education policies, evidence-based and prob-
lem-focused, need to concentrate their attention on critical areas of
education, especially in times of social change and crisis.
4.6  Recommendations
4.6.1  Effective consolidation of the school
network
The optimization of the school network is not yet satisfactory - in
order to optimize resources, the number of staff, school units and
schools themselves needs to be aligned with the declining number of
students. More effective cooperation between national and local gov-
ernments is needed, and flexible solutions cooperatively designed
and implemented.
A new concept of revitalized rural education has to be developed and
implemented, that combines infrastructure and community develop-
97 See: https://www.protivkorupcije.rs/srb/Novosti.php?pg=3 (unpublished report)
138
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
ment work with education provision, and uses a wide range of effec-
tive mechanisms, from digital and blended education and teaching
(where appropriate), to developing community education and cultur-
al centres in existing school facilities.
4.6.2	 Enhancing the quality of education
and high competencies for all
Outcome oriented and flexible curriculum that nurtures not only sub-
jects-specific but also cross-curricular competencies, creativity, in-
novation and critical thinking, teaching methodologies that facilitate
knowledge construction instead of reproductive learning, school at-
mosphere oriented to teamwork, authentic assessment, constru