rom
the patterns of the early 2000s, when there seemed to be rather sta-
ble patterns of high fertility around 1.85 in Northern Europe and the
US, and low fertility around 1.3-1.4 in the rest of Europe. There now
appears to be some convergence in TFRs across this region to a level
of around 1.5. This picture certainly does not confirm the view of a
convergence around the higher rate of 1.85, which had been seen in
the U.S. and Northern European countries.
Given all these uncertainties and national differences in fertility lev-
els, what then do we know about the likely long-term fertility levels
at the end of demographic transition? A major effort to summarise
the state of our knowledge about the drivers of low fertility and fu-
ture trends involving hundreds of population experts from around the
world is reported in the work of Basten et al. (Basten et al., 2014). It
includes a detailed assessment of different arguments concerning the
determinants of fertility in such dissimilar domains as biomedicine
and contraception, cultural and social forces shaping fertility ideas,
norms and desires, changes in partnership and living arrangements,
employment and the economy, education and finally the possible role
of policies trying to directly or indirectly influence fertility. This last
factor will be discussed in more detail in Section VI. The conclusions
from this most comprehensive assessment was that fertility trends
will likely continue to be context-dependent, implying that glob-
al convergence to any particular level is unlikely, but if such a level
needs to be assumed for the purpose of producing population pro-
jections, it should be well below 2.1. For projections, an alternative to
assuming one convergence level is to produce alternative scenarios
reflecting plausible ranges of possible future trends and comparing
the outcomes in terms of future population sizes. This approach will
be taken for the projections presented in the next section, combining
different fertility scenarios with different scenarios on future migra-
tion levels, which are even harder to forecast than fertility because of
their greater volatility.
At this point it is also appropriate to say a word about the possible im-
pact of the COVID-19 crisis on future mortality and fertility trends.
Several recent studies have modelled how COVID-19 mortality could
impact life expectancy as a function of the prevalence of the disease
in the population, and the age structures of the populations at risk,
since the virus affects older age-groups much more severely than
younger ages (Marois, Muttarak, and Scherbov, 2020). Generally,
the results show that for the year 2020, in countries with a COVID-19
prevalence below 1%, there will be hardly any visible effect on life ex-
36
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
pectancy. In the hardest hit regions of Europe, however, there could
be short-term decline of some 3-4 years of life expectancy on average,
if no harvesting effect is assumed (i.e. if the people dying of COV-
ID-19 would not have died anyhow from other causes over the course
of the same year). To what degree there is such a harvesting effect can
only be assessed retrospectively, 2-3 years in the future when we will
have more detailed information.
If there are no serious lasting health problems among those surviving
a COVID-19 infection, then over the coming years the trend in life ex-
pectancy should revert back to its earlier tendency to increase, rather
than decrease. One can even speculate that in highly developed coun-
tries the possible consequences of strong efforts to improve health
systems and vaccination rates during the COVID-19 crisis could even
reinforce the likely future increases in life expectancy, contributing to
longer term continued health outcomes. On the other hand, econom-
ic depression together with high unemployment could have serious
psycho-social conseque