ees by occupations), data at the level of the local self-government unit will be used, because the given data
are officially collected at that level, not for the settlements.
age, it is important to include the entire developed conurbations
(Domhardt & Troeger-Weiß, 2009). This solves the issue of the so-
called ”flight to the suburbs“, where the demographic depopulation
of the central urban settlement occurs at the expense of its growing
suburbs, and which as a whole zone usually does not shrink169.
182
C H A P T E R 8
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
No.
ASPECT
No.
CRITERION
1.
Demo-
graphic
C0
Population trends (current growth or
decline)
2.
C1
Population of the city (i.e. the demograph-
ic size of the city)
3.
Economic
C2
Financial indicators (budget, investments,
salaries) per capita
4.
C3
The character of the city economy accord-
ing to the share of employees by econom-
ic activities, especially in industry
5.
C4
Presence of high-order city functions
(higher education, high culture, scientific
research institutes, etc.)
6.
C5
Position of the city in relation to the near-
est higher order road, i.e. highway
7.
Administra-
tive
C6
Position of the city in relation to the state
border
8.
C7
Position of the city in relation to the coun-
try’s larger cities
9.
Social
C8
Urban housing characteristics (increase
in new construction and number of empty
dwellings trend)
Table 1. Criteria for the analysis of urban shrinkage in Serbia’s cities170
170 Ecological criteria were included in preliminary research for available data. For example, a correlation between population density in an urban area and population
growth or loss of the relevant city was examined. However, such correlations have not been noticed. This observation is otherwise in line with the international
sources, which shows that these ecological conditionalities can influence both positively and negatively on the urban shrinkage. For instance, the decline of small and
medium-sized cities in Finland in the late 20th century is directly linked with the risen ecological awareness and the related strengthening of environmental legislation,
which has consequently hindered the development of local wood industry as the backbone of the economy of these cities.
171 In Serbia, the division of local self-government units into cities and municipalities has been legally introduced since 2007. In terms of the current Law on Territorial
Organization of the Republic of Serbia, cities are actually former larger local self-government units (i.e. former larger municipalities), mostly those where the seats of
administrative districts are located. Such ‘cities’ include a central urban settlement (in the original sense of the word city, used in this research), but also a large number
of rural settlements and vast areas under agricultural and forest land, which do not have urban characteristics. This ambiguity has led to great dilemmas in the use of
terms in public life, where they are often confused.
172 The 100,000-population threshold is taken in most global and European surveys as the line dividing a large and medium-sized city. Similarly, most countries in the east-
ern half of Europe have a threshold between small and medium-sized cities ranging from 25,000 to 50,000 inhabitants.
173 The Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (as well as de jure Kosovo and Metohija / references to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999)) should be emphasised at this point, as the only part of the state with essentially obtained autonomy at regional level, with its own budget, finan-
cial transfers stipulated by the constitution, basic jurisdictions and the position of a legal entity. All mentioned elements of autonomy are nevertheless implemented
through provincial government, located exclusively in Novi Sad as a provincial capital. Administrative districts in Serbia are more the element