 easier to plan, both spatially and temporally,
than some others, which makes them an important lever in prevent-
ing (further) urban shrinkage.
4.7  Position of a city with respect
to the state border and in relation
to urban depopulation
The position of the city in relation to the state border is the first crite-
rion which investigates the governing-administrative aspect of urban
decline. State border and border cities have also relatively recently be-
come the topic of urban shrinking, probably because the first research-
ers of shrinking cities were usually from territorially large countries,
such as the United States, Russia, or Australia, where border cities are
relatively rare, or the western half of Europe, where the ‘Schengen
system’ of permeable or soft borders has greatly reduced the develop-
ment constraints of border cities and regions. Relatively rare research
in this area is found for countries which have a large number of bor-
der towns, such as the Baltic States. In them, a large number of cities
near the ‘hard’ eastern borders have development problems precisely
because of this obstacle (Bruneckiene & Sinkiene, 2015). Therefore,
it was observed that the level of border permeability considerably af-
fects the development of border cities (Haase et al., 2014).
As expected, the solution for the redevelopment of shrinking border
cities is to increase border permeability. The best examples are the
former border cities along the former ‘Iron Curtain’ between East-
ern and Western Europe during the Cold War. A well-known exam-
ple is the distinctly border city of Trieste, which, after the expansion
of the EU to the east and the ‘erasure’ of the hard border between
Italy and Slovenia experienced redevelopment and reurbanisation
(Draper, 2021). Among the examples of medium-sized cities, the
example of Sopron in western Hungary is illustrative, in a ‘pocket’
surrounded on three sides by Austria. After a decades of stagnation
and decline, this city has experienced an economic and demograph-
ic revival in recent years due to the weakening of the border effect
and a new opening towards a significant Austrian market in the
area (Sik, 2015). In both cases, the permeability of the borders was
paired with the connection of interrupted transport links, enabling
190 Making the so-called ‘blind’ transport network termination points usually has a favourable impact only in the short term, while in the long term it contributes to the
effect of ‘sucking out’ the potential from a given environment as dependent and unequal in the broader network.
191 Annex – Table 8. Values are calculated as the distance of the city centre from the nearest highway junction. Cities where a highway intersects or touches an urban area
have been assigned the ‘0’ value.
Figure 6. Distance of medium-sized cities from the nearest state
border in relation to the population decline or growth
0
25
50
75
100 km
Scale
Legend
Rivers
Bigger cities
Smaller cities
Hungary
Romania
Bulgaria
North Macedonia
Montenegro
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
<90%
90-95%
95-100%
100-105%
105-110%
>110%
6
5
4
3
2
1
0 km
15 km
30 km
45 km
60 km
75 km
Subotica
Sombor
Kikinda
Novi Sad
Zrenjanin
Vršac
Pančevo
Beograd
Šabac
Loznica
Valjevo
Smederevo
Požarevac
Bor
Zaječar
Jagodina
Kragujevac
Čačak
Užice
Novi Pazar
Kraljevo
Kruševac
Prokuplje
Leskovac
Pirot
Vranje
Niš
Srem. Mitrovica
SRBIJA
Distance from the state border for period 2002-2011
Demographic growth/decline for period 2002-2011
191
C H A P T E R 8
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
192 The distance of the city boils down to the linear distance of the city centre from the nearest state border.
193 Annex - Table 9.
194 It is almost certain that the lack of language barriers for given countries also reduces the impact of the border.
195 It is how most of the international surveys of shrinking cities determine the threshold between large and medium-sized cities.
