uses. However, since a few years ago, and es-
pecially with the COVID 19 pandemic, this was expanded
to the whole mountain (especially in Vrdnik, which was in
a significant demographic decline). This trend can also be
observed on Mt. Kosmaj, in Veliko Gradište, Golubac, and in
the area between Užice and Zlatibor.
However, it is doubtful whether these processes actually ad
to the repopulation of existing villages, since lifestyle mi-
grants usually opt for new houses built in new settlements,
sometimes in former agricultural or even forest land, ne-
glecting emptied houses in the nearby villages.
2.2  Population Dynamics and
Climate Change in Serbia
Connecting population dynamics and climate change is a complex
and often controversial task. It is important that any discussion of
the links between the two takes into consideration both the size of
population and its structure, as well as the consumption patterns. It
is much fairer to say that consumers, rather than people, contribute
to climate change; and important to recognize that there is a signif-
icant variation in contribution to climate change between developed
countries (with intense consumption and low fertility rates) and de-
veloping countries (with negligible consumption and high fertility
rates).224 It should also be clear that socio-demographic factors (e.g.
growth rates, composition, spatial distribution and education levels)
affect the adaptive and mitigation potential of populations. Last but
not least, migration should be regarded as a crucial aspect linking
population and climatic change (Stephenson et al., 2010).
One of the analytical tools used to better understand the interplay
between population growth and composition, climate change and so-
cio-economic development, is the concept of Shared Socioeconom-
ic Pathways (SSPs) has been introduced (KC & Lutz, 2017). SSPs are
scenarios of projected socioeconomic and climatic global changes up
to 2100225 based on five narratives describing alternative socio-eco-
nomic and climate developments (Riahi et al., 2017). Up until recent-
ly, climate models have included only very rough estimates of future
population changes. However, SSPs scenarios take into consideration
multiple population characteristics (Lutz & Striessnig, 2015). The
basic ideas behind the SSPs storylines are presented in the box and
summarized in the Figure 6 (for an extended description of the SSP
storylines, see: O’Neill et al., 2014; O’Neill et al., 2015; Fricko et al.,
2016). In a nutshell, these narratives describe the alternative paths of
future society. SSP1 and SSP5 scenarios predict relatively optimistic
future human development, with significant investments in educa-
tion and health, fast economic growth and well-functioning institu-
tions. They are different in sense that SSP 5 assumes that this will be
driven by an energy-intensive economy based on fossil fuels, while
in SSP1 there is a growing shift towards more sustainable society.
SSP3 and SSP4 are more pessimistic regarding future economic and
social development, with little investment in education or health in
poorer countries, coupled with rapid population growth and growing
inequalities. SSP2 is a “middle of the road” scenario with historical
patterns of development continue throughout the 21st century.226
Table 1 shows the correlation of key components of population
change with SSP models. The yellow colour in the table indicates the
group of countries with low fertility to which Serbia also belongs. In
this part of research, the method of multi-dimensional mathematical
demography was used to project Serbian population based on alter-
native assumptions on future, fertility, mortality, migration and edu-
cational transitions that correspond to the five shared socioeconomic
pathways (SSP) storylines (for more details, see: KC & Lutz, 2017).
224 Of course, one should be aware of the cases of China and India (the world’s two largest countries, by population) that combine population