). This includes
all countries that have shifted to notional defined contribution sys-
tems,140 as well as a number of those with defined benefit systems141
(Finland, Spain and partly Portugal) (OECD, 2019; Carone et al.,
2016). In the context of deliberation on structural reforms and imple-
mentation of a new system, France envisages defining the point value
at cohort level, with the proviso that, beside the wage bill, its value
is also informed by inter-generational life expectancy differences,
which is viewed as a ‘major innovation in the point system’ (Boulhol,
2019: 34, 45).
To curb expenditure in Serbia, it is essential to further tighten the eli-
gibility requirements for accelerated benefits and to explore whether
the provision of specific non-contributory benefits such as personal
disability would reduce the number of recipients of and expenditure
on survivor and disability pensions, while extending protection to all
who need it and enhancing possibilities for combining social benefits
with employment.
Cost curbing and expenditure-side measures are not the only strate-
gic option to ensure balancing the pension system in the face of pop-
ulation ageing. Employment and output growth, reduction of grey
economy, more efficient administration and better collection of taxes
and contributions are crucial in Serbia (Matković, 2016).
2.3  Shift to the notional defined
contribution system
In the mid 90s, a number of countries shifted from defined benefits
(DB) to notional defined contributions (NDC) in the public part of the
pension system, with a view to greater individualisation, lower redis-
tribution and strong links between contributions paid and pension
level (Italy, Latvia, Poland and Sweden). In NDC schemes, which are
also financed on PAYG basis, contributions are recorded in individual
accounts to which a notional rate of return is applied, and pensions are
adjusted to the life expectancy of the cohort.
The key advantage of NDC systems are many automatic adjustments
that reduce the scope for discretionary political decisions (Holzmann,
2017); they are, hence, assessed as being the most resistant to eco-
nomic and demographic shocks (Boulhol, 2019). Via the calculation
formula, life expectancy gains automatically reduce pensions at the
time of retirement. Incentives to retire later are explicit and substan-
tial, which potentially drives the effective retirement age upwards and
may be relevant in view of population ageing. As the notional interest
rate is tied to parameters such as growth rates of the wage bill, con-
tributions bill or GDP, the pension system is affected by changes in
economic strength and labour market developments (Boulhol, 2019).
Simplicity and low administrative costs are also cited as advantages
(Barr, 2012), as is transparency, especially in terms of a clear distinc-
tion between the portion of old-age income funded with contributions
and that provided from the budget to achieve redistribution goals (dis-
ability, child care, top-up for low pension recipients).
The most commonly cited disadvantage is difficulty of understanding
the concept and the impact of design on pension levels (Holzmann,
2017). According to some authors, possible disadvantages include
inflexibility, as well as absence of social dialogue, especially since au-
139 It is also necessary to review mandatory retirement, which has been repealed by a few countries (UK, Denmark and Poland) (OECD, 2017).
140 Notional defined systems (NDC) will be explained in the following section.
141 In defined benefit (DB) plans the level of pension is guaranteed and benefits are linked to length of service and earnings.
171
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
tomatic mechanisms have the sole purpose of ensuring fiscal stabili-
ty, but not pension adequacy (Filgueira & Manzi, 2017). Absence of
redistribution may also be a serious weakness, unless the country has
oth