hich can stimulate the establishment of an appropriate
work-parenting balance, primarily through a developed and accessi-
ble system of preschool institutions and long-term financial support
to parents with children.
In the domestic context, the direct effects of the crisis on the delay
and potential abandonment of childbirth during the 1990s have al-
ready been detected, so that social, economic, and political turbulence
is not a suitable ground for family planning (Rašević, 2006; Rašević,
2015; Penev, 2010). However, the crisis in our context did not end with
changes in 2000, but trends continued in the same direction, with
lower fertility rates and a negative migration balance (Nikitović, et al.,
2019; Rašević, Galjak, 2021; Penev, 2010). Therefore, it is necessary to
develop mechanisms to mitigate or eliminate the effects of social and
economic insecurities that have clear effects on the family dynamic.
Although it is generally accepted that there is a considerable gap be-
tween the desired, planned and achieved number of children, unfor-
tunately there is not enough domestic research to analyse this relation-
ship more precisely. The available data show that over 90% of young
people (15 to 30 years of age) see themselves married and with children
(Popadić and Pavlović, 2019). About one in three young people (30%)
did not know how many children they would like to have, and those
who did, usually stated two (52%), significantly less three (32%), and
less than 5% only one child. According to older research conducted on
the student population, most young people want to have a child or chil-
dren, the desired number of children is 2.95, and when it comes to more
realistic predictions and plans, that number drops to 2.35, while men
have slightly higher expectations compared to women (Kuburović,
2003: 47–48).30 So, as in other research, in Serbia, too, there is a discrep-
ancy between the desired and actual number of children, indicating
that individuals usually do not reach the desired number of children.
We get interesting insights based on research with women aged 15 to
49. Almost all women who do not have children want to be mothers
in the future. Only one in twenty of them (5%) states that she does
not want to have children, 58% expect to have their first child soon,
23% later, 5% are not sure about the time, while 6% are undecided.
Women who have one child show different patterns of further fami-
ly planning, where we can notice the lowering of aspirations towards
a smaller number of children. More than one in three (37%) do not
want more children and do not plan to expand their family, 33% would
like or expect another child soon, 20% a little later, only 0.1% are not
sure about the time, while 8% are undecided. With each subsequent
child, the desire to have a another one decreases, so that as many as
75% of women who have two children do not want to give birth any-
more ((Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia and UNICEF, 2020:
55). The same research shows that there are significant differences in
fertility rates in urban and rural areas (1.4 in urban and 1.9 in rural ar-
eas), but there are no differences among women in terms of desire to
have a second child. Women in urban and rural areas equally (do not)
want to give birth after the first child, but the birth of the second child
still happens more often rural areas. We can assume that patriarchal
patterns in rural areas are more pronounced and that women in rural
areas are less likely to make the decision about having a subsequent
29 Familism represents the ideology of civil marriage which implies heteronormativity (heterosexuality as a normatively preferred form of marriage), monogamy, clearly
divided gender spheres and roles, where the man is in charge of the public sphere (economy and politics) and has the instrumental role of breadwinner (who secures
the family materially), and the woman is in charge of the private sphere (household and parental care) and has