rlapping strategies: the Strategy for the Develop-
ment of Artificial Intelligence 2020-2025, Strategy for the Develop-
ment of Digital Skills 2020-2024, and the Strategy for the Develop-
ment of Education to 2030. These strategies are based on the EU
Digital Education Action Plan, and the first experiences with COVID
19 lockdown in Serbia, and provide for digitalization in education
as an important objective. The strategies encompass, in somewhat
fragmented fashion, several broad measures, that are, however,
more oriented towards informatics as an education subject or ed-
ucation track, and on preparing the system for providing online or
hybrid education for compensatory or emergency purposes (for cer-
tain target groups such as rural children, dropout prevention, educa-
tion of children abroad or sick children, etc., as well as in emergency
situations, such as partial or total school lockdown), than towards
equipping all students with IT skills to be used in all subject areas
in order to foster learning focused on IT, teamwork and innovation.
87 In 2018, approximately 55% of teachers in Europe held an MA degree, while in several countries this percentage was above 75%, i.e. in Finland, Czech Republic, Portugal,
etc. (TALIS, 2018).
88 Among countries which have national legislation on school practice, only in Romania is the amount lower (5 ECTS), whereas in other countries, it is 30 or more. Expert
studies in most countries comprise 60-120 ECTS (Eurydice, 2021).
134
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
It is indicative that Serbia is not monitoring teacher digital compe-
tencies and student performance, and is not yet participating in the
International Computer and Information Literacy Survey (ICLIS),
conducted on a 5-year basis.
4.2.1  Providing appropriate infrastructure
– hardware and connectivity
Infrastructure, in terms of hardware and especially connectivity, has
advanced in the period from 2012, from 55.2 % of households pos-
sessing a PC in 2012 to 74.3% in 2020. In 2012, broadband internet
was available only to 38% of households, while it is now accessible
to 80.8% of them. Laptops are less frequently found in households –
52.1% of households in Serbia have laptops. Nevertheless, the average
percentage covers sizable regional differences, Belgrade being above
90% on both key indicators, while all other regions except Northern
Serbia are at around 70-77% on both indicators.
Connectivity of schools is supported by the Ministry of commerce,
tourism and telecommunication that has equipped most of the ex-
isting schools with broadband free of charge internet access, and it
is expected that all schools will be connected. However, this applies
only to the main building of schools and not the satellite units, that
are often in remote rural areas and for which having access to broad-
band internet would be a game changer. An online survey, conducted
in 2020 with more than 50.000 teachers, showed that 56.5% com-
plained about the lack of computers and unstable internet connectiv-
ity of their schools, while 42.6% pointed to the unavailability of tech-
nologies for teachers, indicating that the process of equipping schools
is far from completed (ZUOV, 2021).
4.2.2	 The need for upgrading teacher
digital skills and competencies
Data on teacher digital competencies is not available, but the COV-
ID-19 school lockdown showed that the vast majority of teachers had
serious competency gaps and was unable to use synchronous learning
platforms for conducting instruction. Only 15.6% of teachers report-
ed substantial experience in using digital technologies for teaching,
while one third of them listed the lack of digital competences in their
self-assessment as the main problem during distance education due
to the emergency situation (ZUOV, 2021).
However, the IT competency gap in the teaching profession is of such
scope that it requires thoughtful, sustai