ic transfers,
the positive effect of the second demographic dividend will be negli-
gible. This is the case in most EU countries (Prskawetz & Sambt, 2014
124 Sanderson, WC & Scherbov, S. (2015a). Table 1 ReAging1_v2.1 from the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) website.
125 Based on the population projections of RZS (2021).
126 Serbia’s participation in longitudinal research such as the Generations & Gender Program and the Survey of Health, Aging and Retirement in Europe (SHARE) would be of
particular importance for policy formulation and better understanding the consequences of aging.
127 ‘Overlapping generations (OLG) model mimic an economy in which multiple generations, at different stages of their life cycle, contribute to economic activity by supplying
labor, saving, and investing and also interact with firms and government.’ (Bussolo, Koettl & Sinnott, 2015: 151)
128 See also more recent research, e.g. Lee & Mason (2010)
129 The CESEE region includes Central, Eastern and South-Eastern European countries
130 TFP – total factor productivity, refers to the productivity of all inputs taken together.
:966). Nicholas Barr, on the other hand, points out that the issue of
the sector (public versus private), and even pension design (PAYG
versus funding) is not decisive. Increased output and good govern-
ance are crucial, as are human capital investment policies and in-
creased labor supply (Barr, 2021).
In ageing populations, there is certainly a window for raising the hu-
man capital of the smaller young age groups, thus enabling a rise in
productivity and welfare per capita (Bussolo, Koettl & Sinnott, 2015).
Research findings on the overall impact of ageing on labour produc-
tivity are mixed and vary by occupations and sectors, as well as coun-
try-specific circumstances (Bussolo, Koettl & Sinnott, 2015). IMF sim-
ulations indicate that between 2020 and 2050, as a result of labour
force ageing, the average annual reduction in total factor productiv-
ity growth in Serbia could amount to 0.34, which corresponds to the
Western European countries’ average (Batog, et al., 2019).
Empirical data support the theses about a possible activity rate in-
crease due to women’s higher labour market participation, increase
in older generations’ employment rates and longer working lifespans.
Ambitious reforms could limit Serbia’s labour force decline to only a
few percent by 2050 (Batog, et al., 2019).
According to IMF simulations, population ageing would have an ef-
fect of decelerating GDP per capita growth rates across the CESEE
region by 0.6% per year until 2050.129 Using the complex EEUMOD
model, the report assesses that, with regard to the impact of demo-
graphic shifts on the GDP, ‘South-eastern Europe and Serbia would
be the least affected, as their outlooks for labor supply, TFP,130 and
fiscal balances are not as bad as those for the rest of the CESEE re-
gion’(Batog, et al., 2019:50).
Consequences in the domain of public finance sustainability are
assessed in the context of the impact of ageing on public revenues,
but with an even stronger focus on public expenditures. The concern
that the growing share of older persons drives an unsustainable in-
crease in demand for public services and social transfers prevails in
a significant proportion of research and policy papers, starting from
the notable World Bank report on averting the old-age crisis (World
Bank, 1994). It is also argued that an ageing electorate can further ex-
acerbate public finance unsustainability, although empirical research
into voter preferences by age profile is limited (Bogetić, et al., 2015).
Simultaneously, solutions are sought in adjusting the systems that
potentially bear the brunt of ageing. Hence, consideration of reform
options in the areas of pensions and long-term care, as well as old-age
poverty reduction instruments, is crucial in Serbia as well.
168
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Deve