on of the nature of this measure as a social measure.
43 Only a few, mostly post-socialist countries, have a total leave of one year (OECD, 2021).
85
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
mothers, lowers the pressure on both mothers and fathers at work and
contributes to a better work-family balance.
Rare data show that very few men use leave for child care. Due to the
expectation from a man that, as a good father and husband, he should
first provide for his family financially, his use of this leave is not met
with approval among relatives, friends but also employers. In the la-
bour market, which is still gender selective, men’s income is most often
primary, and parental leave prevents additional jobs, overtime work
and additional earnings (Stanojević, 2018). Employers testify that the
use of parental leave by fathers is sporadic and very underrepresented.
Only 17% of employers state that in their companies there were cases
of some employees taking this leave. This option is least used in public
(local) government authorities, and somewhat more in the private fi-
nancial sector (Đukić-Dejanović et al., 2018).
2.6  Institutional predictability
Institutional predictability of the work of institutions in charge of so-
cial protection and the exercise of parental rights can be a very im-
portant factor in family planning. When the state policy is efficient
and responsible, when it delivers the services it guarantees, when it
does not send contradictory messages, then there are higher odds
that people will rely on such policies when planning a family. So far,
it has been shown that the public administration is insufficiently in-
clusive in formulating certain policies, as well that it has a delayed
response and almost exclusively under pressure from the public and
citizens’ associations. This generates mistrust in parenting support
mechanisms and the perception that measures are being introduced
but also abandoned quickly.
The reduction of institutional trust and the collapse of institutional
predictability were also influenced by the amendments to two key
laws — the Law on Financial Support to Families with Children and
the Labour Law, which have been implemented in the last few years.
Amendments to the Law on Financial Support to Families with Chil-
dren from 2018 brought a number of positive changes. For example,
the possibility of receiving salary compensation during leave on any
basis of income (i.e. any form of contract, which until then was pos-
sible only on the basis of employment) was introduced; the amount
44 The law also included an unconstitutional solution whereby the exercise of a minimum wage during the period of maternity leave (up to 3 months of the child’s life) is
affected only if the woman has worked uninterruptedly for 6 months. This solution was part of a lawsuit that resulted in the amendment of the Law in favour of women
and an order to retroactively pay for everything that mothers have lost.
45 The upper limit of compensation was increased to five average salaries, the number of months included in the calculation of women farmers was reduced to 18, the mini-
mum amount of compensation during maternity leave (but not childcare leave) was established, which cannot be lower than the minimum wage. The unconstitutional inter-
pretation, according to which women who receive compensation for caring for a child with a disability are not entitled to compensation of salary during leave, was removed.
of parental allowance was increased as well the payment period, the
procedures for exercising the right (especially to child allowance)
have become somewhat simpler and faster, and coverage of the costs
of staying in preschool institutions for children receiving material as-
sistance has been introduced.
On the other hand, the Law passed a number of problematic innova-
tions Due to the inability to have uninterrupted 18-month work expe-
ri