e relationship between
value orientations and total fertility rate in Serbia and European
countries, can be seen in Charts 8-10. In the first two charts, we can
see that fertility rates are somewhat higher in societies in which the
views that there should be no gender differences in the labour mar-
ket are more accepted, i.e. that men are not better managers than
women. The correlation between the fertility rate and the attitude
that preschool children will not suffer if their mother works is some-
what more pronounced. At the European level, the acceptance of
gender-egalitarian value orientations in both the public and private
spheres correlates with higher fertility rates. In all models, Serbia
ranks with the group of countries which have relatively high scores
on patriarchal indicators and relatively low total fertility rates, which
ranks it among countries with a gender expectations conflict.
If we look only at the population of Serbia in the last thirty years (Charts
11-13) we notice that there has been a decline in patriarchal values
among both men and women.49 The relative relationship between the
sexes is more or less constant, and implies a somewhat higher degree
of patriarchy of men (more on trends in patriarchal values in Pešić,
Stanojević, 2021). When we observe the trends by level of education
and by sex, we notice that there is a decline in patriarchy and conver-
gence of values in women of all educational levels, while in men there
is a decline in divergence according to educational level. This means
that women are not only becoming less patriarchal, they also have
more similar views of gender roles, while men, although they are be-
coming less patriarchal than before, have greater differences. Those
with higher education are the least patriarchal, those with primary ed-
ucation the most. There was a somewhat greater convergence of atti-
tudes among highly educated women and men, since the difference in
the degree of patriarchy was the smallest among them, mostly due to a
somewhat faster decline in patriarchy among men. As the educational
level of men and women decreases, the degree of differences is higher.
R2 Linear=0,069
Total fertility rate
Pre-school child suﬀers with working mother
1,20
1,75
2,00
2,50
2,75
2,75
1,40
1,60
1,80
Ukraine
Slovakia
Lithuania
Bulgaria
Czechia Romania
Estonia
Hungary
Slovenia
Netherlands
Denmark
France
Iceland
Sweden
Norway
United Kingdom
Poland
Greece
Albania
Italy
Spain
Portugal
Croatia
Finland
Austria
Switzerland
Serbia
Montenegro
Germany
Belarus
Chart 10. Relationship between patriarchal values and total fertility rates in Europe (EVS, 2018)
Source: WVS, 2018, author’s calculations
48 Historically, modernisation has changed the understanding of gender roles. On the one hand, there is a decline in patriarchal values and domination of the mix of tradi-
tional and modern values, which leads to a decrease in fertility, because there is a conflict of roles in both sexes (especially in women). Only after a substantial adoption of
new value models, i.e. a higher degree of acceptance of gender egalitarian roles, is there a renewed increase in fertility because gender roles are in line with expectations.
If this process of modernisation is faster, that is, if the gender value gap in the country decreases faster, the increase in fertility is faster. The effects of gender egalitarian
values are present when they are shared by both men and women and when they are widespread in all educational groups of the population. When value diversification
occurs, opposite effects on fertility are recorded (Arpino et al., 2015).
49 The patriarchy scale consisted of a degree of agreement with four indicators: 1. If one spouse is employed in a marriage, it is more natural for that spouse to be a man, 2.
Most household tasks are more inherent in women, 3. It is good that women and men are equal in marriage, but as a rule it is better for a man to have the last word and 4.
Public activities are closer to