le
service stood at 32 years for men and 30 years for women, below the
EU average (Republički fond za penzijsko i invalidsko osiguranje,
2019)( (EPC-SPC, 2020:12). One out of seven new pensioners benefit
from the early retirement option. Both sexes’ effective retirement age
reached 63.8 years (old-age pensions, all categories), but remained
substantially lower for military pensioners, at only about 56 years.138
136 In 2008, a person with lifetime earnings three times higher than average who retired in 2003 would receive pension equal to 48,700 dinars, while a person with the same
work history who retired in 2008 would receive pension equal to 77,300 RSD (Stanić, 2010:33).
137 Raising the retirement age may be regressive if low earners live shorter lives, although these effects are not large (OECD, 2017:163). Only data on old (65) life expectancy
by education level are available for Serbia, showing that there are no differences between those with highest and lowest education levels, but it is shorter for people with
secondary education (Eurostat, code demo_mlexpecedu).
138 Ministry of Labour data, 2021.
170
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Pension benefit reduction on account of early retirement is fully jus-
tified, since, under the same conditions, individuals retiring before
reaching the retirement age will, in theory, receive pensions longer.
‘Penalties’, however, raise the issue of fairness if those who started
working at a younger age live shorter. It is also worth noting that in-
dividuals may value retirement despite penalties – ‘personal discount
rate may exceed the rate of actuarial adjustment’ (Barr & Diamond,
2006:27). Employers may also request workers who have fulfilled at
least one retirement requirement to retire owing to their lower pro-
ductivity or outdated knowledge and skills in the context of imple-
menting new technologies; the demand for older labour force may
also be low, leaving workers with no other option except to retire as
soon as possible. Retirement may also be due to health reasons that
persist but are not severe enough to qualify for a disability pension.
Under these conditions, penalties result in low pensions, which may
lead to poverty in old age. It is also worth noting that raising the re-
tirement age, as well as closing off early retirement pathways may
lead to a rise in the number of disability pensioners. A certainly unac-
ceptable arrangement in the existing system is that accelerated ben-
efits, which constitute a major pathway to retiring (too) early, are not
subject to penalties.
In the given circumstances in Serbia, it is essential to gain a better
understanding of the reasons for early retirement so as to assess to
what extent pension policy is even capable of affecting retirement
decisions, and to what extent solutions need to be sought in other do-
mains – employment, health and education policies. Furthermore, an
insight into the differences in the length of retirement between recip-
ients of low and high pensions would make it possible to determine
whether and to what extent penalties include redistribution among
pensioners according to their financial situation.
Stronger encouragement of later retirement is another option to be
explored and one that is embedded in the Serbian system in a rela-
tively modest form; however, old-age pensioners have the possibility
of working, along with having their benefit amounts recalculated on
those grounds.139 EU reforms involve different arrangements, from
earnings valorisation even beyond 45 years of pensionable service
(Belgium), to one-off bonuses in case of later exit from the labour
market (Denmark) (OECD, 2019).
2.2.3	 Other parametric changes, options
to be explored
Beside the above automatic mechanisms, many countries have also
introduced automatic adjustment of pension levels to increased old-
age life expectancy (a type of sustainability factor