e survey in RS 2015, author’s calculations
in the share of permanent work. In the period from 2014 to 2020, there
were no significant changes according to the type of contract for those
aged 30-45. This indicates that the pattern of entry into the labour mar-
ket has changed, but the later labour transition has not, as 80% of men
and women aged 30 to 45 work on permanent employment contracts.
The position of men in the labour market is improving (in terms of high-
er share of permanent contracts) in all educational categories, especial-
ly those aged 15-29. The situation is somewhat different for women,
because although we have seen a small increase in the participation of
women aged 15-29 with permanent contracts since 2016, this increase
is almost entirely due to women with higher education, while the par-
ticipation of women with secondary and primary education in the
categories of permanent and temporary employment remains almost
unchanged. Analyses show us that the position in the labour market is
slowly improving, especially for men and highly educated women, but
that it is still far from ideal. The reasons for such trends can be seen first
in the shortage of labour due to emigration and pressure on employers
to offer more stable positions to workers.
Data on the time budget among those active in the labour market
show that men spend 7 hours and 56 minutes at work, in work activi-
ties, while women spend 7 hours and 14 minutes (SORS, 2015), which
indicates relatively small differences among those who are employed,
and a relatively balanced workload. However, data on those who are
parents give a completely different picture and confirm that parent-
hood brings with it a patriarchal division of gender roles.
As the data in the table show, men who are fathers spend significantly
more time on paid work compared to women who are mothers, and
this difference is greater when the children are small. One part of the
explanation lies in parental leave taken almost exclusively by moth-
ers, and the other in the temporary withdrawal from the labour mar-
ket of women when they give birth. As children grow, women return
to the labour market, but the difference in engagement still survives
in favour of men. Although men spend more time at work, it is women
who do far more unpaid household activities that, when children are
small, average almost as much as full-time work.
2.1.3	 Employment rights
Particular challenges in the market are insufficient regulation of work
and inadequate control of working conditions. In such circumstanc-
es, a significant number of employees fail to exercise their employ-
ment rights, such as the right to pension and health insurance, the
right to paid sick leave and paid annual holiday (Chart 4). A signifi-
cant number of employees do not exercise the right to paid sick leave
or paid leave, while the share of those who do not exercise the right
to pension and health insurance is somewhat smaller. Men are at a
disadvantage compared to women, as well as younger workers com-
pared to older ones. The first two indicators indicate that it is either
informal employment or the inability to exercise the rights arising
from the employment contract, while the other two indicators indi-
cate informal employment.
A deeper insight into the labour market indicators shows that, in fact,
no form of work guarantees full certainty and predictability and that
younger workers and men are at particular risk. A very large number
of those who perform occasional and seasonal jobs cannot exercise
any of the mentioned rights (Table 1 in the annex). Even a significant
number of those who work for a definite or even indefinite period have
difficulties to ensure that they are paid their pension and health contri-
butions, as well as the right to paid sick leave and paid annual holiday.
In any case, the data reveal that a significant number of young and
middle-aged people in the labour market do not have the basic secu-
rity necessary f