Primordial prevention is typically the responsibility of
governments. The government is expected to modify the system and
factors that damage health, but also to contribute to actions that have
a positive impact on health. It could include, for example, tobacco
control strategies or urban planning.
Primary prevention prevents the onset of chronic disease by reducing
the risk factors for its development. One type of primary prevention
is reducing risks through changes in either behaviour or exposure,
e.g. reducing cardiovascular risk through lifestyle changes such as
healthy eating and not smoking. Another form of primary prevention
is increased resistance to exposure to illness by means of vaccination.
Immunisation is particularly important in times of great epidemics or
pandemics, such as the current COVID-19 pandemic.
Secondary prevention involves the detection and treatment of pre-
clinical changes. Screening procedures are often the first step, leading
to early and more cost-effective interventions. The screening process
is the combined responsibility of the individual and their healthcare
providers, with an emphasis on patient engagement.
Tertiary prevention focuses on improving the quality of life by reduc-
ing disability, limiting or delaying complications, and restoring func-
tions. It helps to lessen the impact of disease on the patient’s overall
life. The patient has more contact with the healthcare system, and care
providers in many roles and settings. Although tertiary prevention is
important for patients and their families to provide a better quality of
life, it cannot help as much in the prevention of depopulation.
At the level of primordial prevention, government should introduce
additional taxes to producers of fatty and salty foods, restricting ad-
vertising of unhealthy products, and imposing stricter requirements
for opening and expanding fast-food restaurants, especially near
schools. There is no doubt about the importance of constantly re-
viewing the consistency in the implementation and effectiveness of
existing tobacco control measures, but also the need to adopt new,
more radical legal solutions. Also, a revision of current curricula in
elementary and high schools should be a priority.
Educational institutions such as kindergartens and schools are cru-
cial entry points for primary prevention measures for several rea-
sons. Increasing the awareness and knowledge of the importance of
8  Conclusions and Policy Proposals
that electronic prescriptions and therapy are used for a maximum of
nine months, counting from the last prescription instead of the previ-
ous six months (MoH, 2020).
In addition to electronic platforms, it is important to emphasize the
existence of national telephone lines for suicide prevention, for psy-
chosocial support in the COVID-19 epidemic, for adolescents, for
psychological support for women before, during and after pregnancy,
for women victims of violence. All of these lines operate 24 hours a
day and conversations must be confidential and may be anonymous.
Also, the telephone counselling centre “Hallo baby”, which has ex-
isted since 2001 within the Centre for Health Promotion of the City
Institute of Public Health in Belgrade, receives calls and answers
parents’ questions regarding the health and development of children
(Hallo baby, 2022). Some of these lines, such as the National Line for
Psychosocial Support in the COVID-19 Epidemic was established
specifically during the epidemic, but others are equally important,
because such telephone lines are a way to provide information, as-
sistance and advice in crisis situations to people in need of such as-
sistance.
It is clear, however, that in circumstances of patient conditions re-
quiring clinical examination, radiological or laboratory examination,
telemedicine cannot be used. Also, the limiting factor for the use of
telemedicine can be the availability of devices or internet connec-
tions. This is especially true for patien