expected to seriously affect employment levels,
access to education and income security, all of which affect people’s
ability to procure basic goods such as food, fuel and housing, which
further negatively affects health outcomes, exacerbating health ine-
qualities and disproportionately affecting people living in poverty and
other vulnerable groups (UNDP, 2020).
114 Telemedicine is defined as the use of information technology – tablet devices, telephones and computers – for providing health care services when the health care worker
and patient are not in the same location.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also affected the use of digital technolo-
gies in the daily work of health professionals and has led to the expan-
sion of telemedicine in many other countries as well as in the Republic
of Serbia (CDC, 2020). 114 The eZdravlje (eHealth) portal (also avail-
able as a mobile application) is designed to provide information and
enable the use of electronic services in the Serbian healthcare system.
Currently, the portal is intended for insured persons tested for the
presence of coronavirus, in order to obtain feedback on test results.
Also, through the application, it is possible to download the electronic
confirmation of the vaccination against COVID-19 (MoH, 2022a).
At the time of the pandemic, an additional challenge is to continu-
ously provide health care to patients who are not infected with the
SARS-CoV-2 virus. Telemedicine is used as a strategy to maintain
the continuity of health care, as far as possible, in order to avoid the
negative consequences of delaying preventive examinations or pro-
viding services to patients with chronic diseases. Using telemedicine,
the doctor can determine when it is best for the patient to come to
the health institution for an examination, all with the aim of reduc-
ing unnecessary patient visits to health institutions. Doctors can use
electronic prescriptions and provide multi-month dispensing of med-
icines in order to further reduce the need for patients coming in to
surgeries, which has been implemented in our pharmacies since 2017
MoH, 2022a. With the introduction of the state of emergency, the va-
lidity of electronic prescriptions has been extended by three months
in order to minimize the risk of coronavirus transmission. This means
7  Use of Digital Technologies / Telemedicine in
the Era of the COVID-19 Pandemic
159
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
A healthy start to life and healthy habits later in life result in fewer fer-
tility problems, more favourable health outcomes, a longer, more pro-
ductive and better quality of life, which overall leads to later death.
On the other hand, demographic changes, which are characterized by
the aging of the population, require changing the existing framework
of health policy and adapting to new demographic conditions, in the
following directions: more and better preventive services and more
health services for older persons.
All health policy measures aiming to tackle depopulation should, in
essence, be preventive in nature. Preventive healthcare deals with the
prevention of illness to decrease the burden of disease and associat-
ed risk factors. Preventive measures should be applied at all stages
across the lifespan and along a disease spectrum, to prevent further
decline over time. Prevention is described as primordial, primary,
secondary, or tertiary and they often overlap.
The primordial prevention is a population health approach character-
ized as the actions that are taken to prevent future hazards to health
and to decrease (known) risk factors. The broad determinants of
health are addressed rather than individual exposure to risk factors.
Primordial prevention consists of actions to modify population health
determinants and inhibit the establishment of factors (environmen-
tal, economic, social, behavioural) known to increase the future risk
of disease. 