ence, a number of mothers received lower benefits.44 This measure
was introduced in order to reduce potential abuses of exercising the
right to compensation during maternity and parental leave through
the so-called fictitious employment (Stanić, Matković, 2017). Howev-
er, the measure proved to be restrictive for a number of users who did
not intend to “cheat” the system at a time when the mainstream of
state policy was moving in the direction of supporting the family and
pro-natal measures.  The law further prevented parents who receive
compensation for the care and assistance of another person (children
with disabilities) from exercising their right to child allowance. The
resentment also came from parents who had relatively high incomes.
The law set the upper limit of compensation at three average salaries.
After heated public reactions, a lawsuit before the Constitutional
Court and protests from organisations dealing with family issues,
the Ministry of Labour, Employment, Veterans’ and Social Affairs
announced amendments to the disputed sections of the Law, which
were partly corrected in 2021.45
The second law, the amendments of which have been awaited for a
long time, is the Labour Law. Intensified flexibility of work in the EU
context implies new legal solutions in the regulation of labour. That is
not the case with Serbia. The Labour Law privileges employment. Al-
though other forms of labour are recognised, they are largely unreg-
ulated and workers do not exercise almost any right from this work
which is guaranteed as a right resulting from labour (for example,
length of working hours, breaks, paid leave, etc.) (Reljanović, et al.,
2016). Bearing in mind that the share of indefinite term labour is de-
creasing, inadequate regulation of other types of labour carries with it
a risk for many, especially those who belong to vulnerable groups and
those who are just entering the labour market — the young people.
The fact that it is possible to work, be registered as an employee, and
be deprived of certain labour rights, undermines trust in institutions.
Health care system — attitude towards mothers
The process of managing pregnancy and the very act of childbirth in public health institutions is deeply stressful and traumatic for a large
number of women. Insufficient information to patients during the management of pregnancy and childbirth, unkind staff, poor conditions
in hospitals (humidity, heat, large number of patients in the room and common areas), the need to give bribes or use connections, are
some of the reasons why trauma during the first childbirth may be part of the equation when considering and making a decision about a
subsequent birth (Sekulić, 2016; Stanković, 2014).
86
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
The childbearing decision is usually made between spouses and de-
pends on the quality of their relationship. Poor relations and dissatis-
faction can lead to delaying parenthood, or giving up (the subsequent)
birth (Rijken, Liefbroer, 2009). But what does the satisfaction depend
on? Among other things, it depends on the degree of harmonisation
of gender roles — harmonisation in the public and private domain. In
archetypal traditional families, the man is expected to be the bread-
winner of the family, while the woman is primarily focused on their
home and children. If the spouses have expectations which are in line
with this norm and if everyone meets what is expected of him/her, the
level of satisfaction is high, and potentially the desire to have a subse-
quent child. At the other end of the continuum are expectations which
belong to complete gender egalitarianism, both in the labour market
and in the household. If the labour market is gender neutral (there is
no gender gap) and if men and women do household work equally, we
can talk about a balance between expectations and practices, which
leads to a higher degree of sati