efits are budget-funded and non-means-tested (Spasova et al.,
2018) (European Commission, 2019).
Reforms could also include tying benefit amounts to the intensity of
individual support needed and, in the long term, widening the scale
of benefit amounts. Such practice exists in several EU countries (e.g.
Austria, Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany) (European
Commission, 2019). Overall, eligibility assessment should be based
less on medical criteria, and more on functional ones.
It is also necessary to reflect on the link between LTC cash benefits
and LTC services. The discontinuation and subsequent reinstate-
ment of cash benefits upon admission to old-age care homes witness-
es to the policy meanderings in search of system-wide solutions and
highlights the need to explore them in depth. One proposal is that
cash benefits should cover personal care needs, while beneficiaries
themselves should cover the costs of instrumental support, and the
overall system of co-payment for social care services should be de-
signed accordingly (Matković & Stanić, 2014). If cash benefits are
to be used as compensation for care for old persons in the family, it
would make sense to develop individual protection plans and moni-
tor their implementation to prevent neglect. If this idea, recommend-
ed in EU documents (Spasova et al., 2018), is to be followed in Serbia,
it inevitably requires significant strengthening and capacity building
of centres for social work.
3.2.3	 Other issues
One reform option that could reduce system fragmentation is the es-
tablishment of a dedicated government institution in charge of LTC,
with a separate budget. Cross-sectoral cooperation protocols be-
tween health and social institutions could also help overcome system
fragmentation. At the local level, it is essential to ensure coordination
between home care and health home treatment services.
In the coming period, special attention should be given to improving
control mechanisms. Another major challenge is exploring measures
to retain and ensure an adequate supply of service provision staff. The
straightforward part of the solution concerns training and retraining.
However, high demand for these occupations in countries offering
better pay and working conditions155 may drive the emigration of pre-
cisely that segment of the labour force which is needed to introduce
LTC services.
Investment in rehabilitation, prevention and innovative technologies
may significantly contribute to containing costs and raising efficiency
in the area of LTC (Spasova et al., 2018). Innovative technologies may
mitigate workforce shortage, increase productivity, as well as improve
quality of care. In the future, remote medicine, artificial intelligence,
Big Data, drones and robotics will be an essential part of the answer
to the challenges of caring for the old.156 In-home technologies for
older people (safety and health monitoring) and ‘products such as an
artificial Intelligence wheelchair, a convertible bed and body sensors
for bath and bed can help older people live more independently’.157
Simpler technologies such as smartphones, alarms, sensors and GPS
monitors are already available, and experiments are under way with
companionship robots or smart homes (OECD, 2020:162). Improving
service providers’ and clients’ digital competencies inevitably be-
comes an important consideration for the future of the sector.
In the context of overall system reform, it is necessary to consider to
what extent Serbia has financial scope, as well as capacities for sup-
port to family members caring for old persons. In a few EU countries,
such support is provided through training, counselling and respite
care services, introduction of formal psychosocial support, coverage
of caregivers’ social insurance contributions, as well as flexible work-
ing hours and sick leave for caregivers (Spasova et al., 2018).
153 In 2019, the minimum wage stood at RSD 27,022 (€230 ) per month on average.
154 By payment o