rough telemedicine are legally justified. Also, the appli-
cation of telemedicine will bring long-term benefits and help with
everyday challenges in health systems.
C H A P T E R 7
Gordana Matković
Population Ageing
164
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Population ageing is a key demographic feature of early 21st century
Serbia and one of the major challenges in the context of depopula-
tion. Longer participation in the workforce certainly contributes to
a solution assuming a sufficient supply of jobs, healthy ageing and
greater investment in the skills of older persons. In the short term,
tackling the risks and effects of ageing includes appropriate pension
policy, developing long-term care system and reducing extreme pov-
erty among old persons.116
According to 2019 data, Serbia had approximately 1.4 million peo-
ple aged 65 and over (20.7%), of whom over 320 thousand were old-
est-old (80+) (4.6%). The older population was dominated by wom-
en, with a share of about 60% and rising in the oldest age groups.
Population ageing is becoming increasingly pronounced over time.
According to the first post-war census of 1948, the share of the old-
er population117 was three and a half times lower than today (5.6%).
Projections show that demographic ageing is set to intensify in the fu-
ture and that the ageing of the older population will continue. Under
the given assumptions (medium-variant), in 2041, the share of older
persons (65+) will exceed 24%, and that of the oldest-old (80+) will
rise to 7.5% (Table 1). Long-term projections, until 2100, show, how-
ever, that this upward trend can be slowed down and even stopped,
depending on the assumptions about the determinants of population
change, especially migration.118
The share of older people (65+) in Serbia is slightly above the EU av-
erage, while the share of the oldest-old (80+) is below average. The
lower ranking according to the latter indicator is a result of a larger
difference in the oldest-old mortality compared to EU countries and
the specificity of the age waves in Serbia (Stojilković Gnjatović &De-
vedžić, 2020).
According to 2019 estimates, the share of the older population was
above the national average in two thirds of Serbia’s municipali-
ties. In fewer than ten municipalities, mainly small ones in east-
ern and southern Serbia, the share of older persons exceeds 30%
(municipalities of Babušnica, Crna Trava, Gadžin Han, Knjaževac,
Kučevo, Ražanj, Rekovac, Svrljig, Žagubica) (RZS, 2021a). All are
in development tier 4, i.e. the least developed local governments
in Serbia. Large differences are also noticeable at the district and
regional level, which is reflected in sub-national  human develop-
ment index.119
Quite rightly, the definition of population ageing based on a fixed age
threshold has been challenged in recent years. Hence, new indicators
have been developed, such as the prospective proportion old and the
prospective old-age dependency ratio, based on the measure of re-
maining life expectancy (Sanderson & Scherbov, 2008). Under this
concept, old persons are those whose life expectancy is below 15 years
(prospective threshold). The United Nations has also started moni-
toring indicators based on the prospective threshold in its publica-
tions on population ageing.120
If this concept were applied to Serbia’s past situation, ageing would
be even more pronounced (Devedžić & Stojilković, 2012), but fu-
ture prospects are more optimistic. Based on Sanderson & Scherbov
(2015), Serbia’s proportion of older persons with a life expectancy
1  Key Demographic and Economic Consequences
of Population Ageing
116 Among other issues outside the scope of this chapter are numerous social concerns that intensify with ageing, such as ageism, social participation of the older population,
domestic violence and abuse, etc.
117 For the purposes of this report, the older population is defined