a fixed, one-off payment.40 For the second child, the parents receive
financial support for two years (24 equal monthly instalments of RSD
10,641.29), while for the third and the fourth child they have longer-
term financial support, which lasts ten years (the monthly instalment
for the third child amounts to RSD 12,769.55 and for the fourth RSD
19,154.33). New, longer-term measures began to be applied in 2018, so
their effects have not yet been explored.
Child allowance is a measure aimed at parents and families who are fi-
nancially vulnerable. In order to exercise this right, the family income
(per household member) should be below the determined income
minimum.41 An application for this type of financial support is submit-
ted every year, and parents exercise this right until the child reaches 19
years of age. A maximum of four children in a family can receive this
type of support at the same time and the measure is conditioned by the
84
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
children’s regular school attendance. Entitlement to child allowance
may be extended if the child has a developmental or physical disability.
Of the three mechanisms of financial support to parenting listed above,
only one measure is universal and exceeds the time frame of one year
— parental allowance for the second, the third and the fourth child.
The effects of this measure are still not visible, given the short period of
time since its introduction, as well as the effects of the COVID19 crisis
on fertility, which have yet to be considered. The fundamental ques-
tion is whether, in circumstances in which the key challenge is deciding
to have a second child, directing financial support to the third and the
fourth child can have significant effects? The Strategy for Encouraging
Childbearing has already stated that the introduction of longer finan-
cial support to parents for the second child would lower the economic
price of parenting and have more positive effects on the decision to
have a second child. Given that having a second child in Serbia is a key
challenge to increasing fertility (rather than subsequent children), the
focus of policies and practical measures should be primarily on parents
planning their second child (Strategy, 2018). As part of the current fi-
nancial allocations, the extension of the parental allowance to the sec-
ond child should be considered.
2.5  Maternity, parental and
paternity leave
Parental leave is a measure which guarantees continuity of income dur-
ing a woman’s recovery period and the first months of a baby’s life. Al-
though this measure is generally good, research shows that, depending
on the social context, a long absence can have negative consequences
on deciding on the next birth and cumulatively on fertility (Hilgeman,
Butts, 2009), while in some circumstances it has positive effects (D’Ad-
dio, Mira d’Ercole, 2005; Luci, Thevnenon, 2011). The advantage of a
longer absence is visible in those societies which do not have a suffi-
ciently developed infrastructure of preschool institutions, and in which
a shorter absence would lead to faster exclusion of women from the
sphere of work. The positive aspects are also reflected in the security
that parents have in the labour market during this period. The risks are
reflected in a longer period of absence from work and difficulties in re-
turning to work, an increase in the gender pay gap and reduced oppor-
tunities for women to advance in their career compared to their male
counterparts. Additionally, when the right to financial compensation
during parental leave is related to employment, it is more likely that
parenthood will be delayed until the right to full or optimal amount of
compensation during leave is exercised.
Financial compensation during maternity leave (which begins at least
one month before the due date and lasts until the third month of the
child’s life), as well as l