rs: Development of business-creative incubators through new construction or the reuse of exist-
ing space in important city spots for the purpose of promoting the preservation of highly educated staff in the private sector,
with emphasis on new technologies, digitalisation and creative industries.
M.13
M.05
M.08
Zones of new urban functions: Transformation of planned manufacturing-industrial zones through an expanded range of
possible functions (transport and logistics, business, wholesale, etc.).
M.14
M.12
Functional renewal of city centres: Renovation of city centres in a functional sense through planned incentivising for the
construction of shopping centres and the design of shopping streets, while respecting the existing ambience values.
M.15
M.06
M.11
Housing nodes: Renovation of existing housing capacities in strategically important spots in the city, where there is a greater
concentration of jobs and leisure content at the same time.
204 It is important to underpin that the association and cooperation between the units of self-government (municipalities and cities) in Serbia is already possible by opera-
tive Law on Local Self-Government (Articles 88a-88d). Nevertheless, this cooperation is on a voluntary basis, which calls in question the obligation of such associations,
as well as their efficiency and the duration of the results achieved through this form of collaboration.
205 Here, in addition to highways and other four-lane roads, high-speed roads also include two-lane roads which bypass settlements and have multi-level junctions, which
ensures higher speed and the easier flow of vehicles.
206 For example, the formation of a cultural-museum district in Sombor, as a city with the best-preserved old town among medium-sized cities in Serbia, a cultural and
educational centre on mining in Bor or ancient Roman archaeological sites in Sremska Mitrovica.
196
C H A P T E R 8
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
on urban shrinkage at the global level. For example, the impact (6) of
the proximity to the state border is very pronounced in the analysed
cities, which is in line with the fact that Serbia is a relatively small
country with far from soft borders. In terms of financial conditions,
there (7) is a much greater impact on local demographic dynamics
if local incomes are lower than average salaries, because the money
earned is apparently spent elsewhere, in larger cities and tourist des-
tinations, which is not reflected in the improvement of opportunities
in the analysed cities. It should be noted that (8) the degree of local
investment has proven to be a fairly reliable indicator of the demo-
graphic vitality of an area, and its importance is even greater when it is
known that investments indicate the future prospects rather than the
current state of a city.
5.3  Action rationale
Based on the previous findings on urban shrinkage in Serbia and their
understanding from the perspective of global information about the
phenomenon of urban shrinkage, appropriate sets of measures are
proposed for the analysed medium-sized cities, which are addition-
ally linked with certain UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
In accordance with the already emphasised importance of these cit-
ies for the balance of spatial demographic development of the state,
the implementation of the proposed measures would have an indirect
impact both at the regional level and on the dependent rural area.
5.4  Where to start? Initial steps
The first two sets of proposed measures – Strengthening district seats
(M.01) and Intersectoral development centres (M.02) – represent the
first step in implementing development according to the set of city
clusters. The implementation of these measures is a precondition for
the rest. The highest level of state government plays the most impor-
tant role in their implementation, as by far the most organised and
influential, given the high level of centr