 to distinguish what is the cause and what is the
consequence of urban shrinkage.164
The first key question faced by decision-makers and experts in a
shrinking city is what the goal of the measures is – a return to the for-
mer (demographic) growth or stabilisation of the situation in the city
through adaptation to urban shrinkage (Hospers, 2014)? Although the
former is usually sought at the local level, the latter has proved more
certain, especially because urban shrinkage does not have to be neg-
ative per se, if, for example, it is accompanied by an increase in the
quality of life and the environment. There are also other, somewhat
arguable strategies: the first is to consciously bypass the shrinkage
topics in city administration165, and the second is the use of the main
local features of shrinkage in a way that they are used in creative ways
as potentials for new development (Hospers, 2014). All given ap-
proaches had their examples in local practice through different devel-
opment policies with positive and negative outcomes. Practice shows
that there is no global solution to urban shrinkage, but it should be
sought in a combination of international guidelines and recommen-
dations and local and regional characteristics (Haase et al., 2014).
All the described efforts to adequately respond to urban shrinkage as
a mass and complex phenomenon are important for the Republic of
Serbia, where for the first time in the last census in 2011 it was noted
that most of the 167 official urban settlements166  had shrunk during the
peacetime period, i.e. after the Second World War. Also, for the first
time, it was noted that most of the medium-sized cities, seats of ad-
ministrative districts in Serbia and those that are the key link between
larger cities and rural areas, had shrunk. Despite their similar size, me-
dium-sized cities are characterised by the different features of urban
shrinkage and depopulation, as well as great diversity in a number of
other features. The main goal of this chapter is to create medium-sized
city clusters167 based on the given similarities and differences of their
urban shrinkage, for which sets of development policy measures would
be established. The given measures would refer to several spatial levels:
(1) within the (urban) settlement, (2) the city in relation to its immedi-
ate surroundings and (3) the city in relation to its broader surroundings,
i.e. the surrounding cities and to larger cities in Serbia. In this way, a
broader contribution is made through an innovative approach in urban
policy planning in relation to depopulation, because it improves the
previous urban and spatial planning in Serbia, where so far not much
attention has been paid to urban shrinkage and its relation to depop-
ulation at a broader level (municipal, district, regional and national).
163 Larger cities are considered to be cities with over 100,000 inhabitants.
164 However, according to the majority of renowned sources, a shrinking city is a densely populated urban area, i.e. a uniquely built-up area consisting of the city and its
suburbs (if any), which experiences population loss for at least two years due to declining economic activity, and which had at least 10 thousand inhabitants prior to
shrinkage. In practice, a time period between two 10-year censuses is usually taken.
165 This seems to be the approach which currently prevails among Serbian cities.
166 In line with the division of  settlements into urban and rural by the Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia.
167 Medium-sized cities which had a demographic growth in 2011 would also be included, because according to the latest official estimates, some of them have become shrinking.
168 This refers to the city as a central settlement and its spatially fused suburbs, if any, which are officially independent settlements, regardless of whether they are listed as rural
or, less frequently, as urban.
169 In certain economic criteria (salaries, investments, employ