w quality vocational education
and training (VET) qualifications not leading to decent employability.
Children in families where the head of the family has no secondary
education have a 4.5 times higher chance of falling below the poverty
line (Čekić Marković et al. 2021). Many students, especially disadvan-
taged students, hold lower ambitions than would be expected given
their academic achievement. In Serbia, one in eight high-achieving
disadvantaged students – but 1 in 50 high-achieving advantaged stu-
dents – do not expect to complete tertiary education (OECD, 2019).
This puts Serbia in danger of having a high percentage of low skilled
or uneducated people who cannot contribute to economic develop-
ment or satisfy their own living needs, and ensure a decent life for
their families. In the search for job opportunities, they might also mi-
grate to countries that are lacking in a lower skilled work force (Aran-
darenko, this volume). Although students from low SES families can
be partially jeopardized in other countries as well, Serbia cannot af-
ford to lose the human capital of these young people. Other countries
can mitigate the loss through increasing immigration; in Serbia, that
mechanism is not a realistic option.
The Roma population in Serbia, as in most European countries, is
the youngest population and represents a demographic asset. The
average age of the Roma in Serbia is 28.3 years, and it is estimated
that over 50% of Roma are under the age of 25, thus creating a higher
percentage of Roma in the school aged population than in the adult
population (SIPRU, 2021). Informal assessments state that the school
age cohort of Roma children could increase to 5,000-10,000 per co-
hort (FOD, 2010).75 Therefore, a high quality of education and the
development of competencies of Roma students should be seen as a
priority and competent, well-educated young Roma as a comparative
advantage and the country’s cherished asset.
However, although serious education boosting activities have result-
ed in positive changes in the education trajectory of the Roma (Figure
13), the majority of this population is still undereducated.
These numbers correspond with population census data from 2011,
which revealed 33.3% of Roma with completed primary school, 11.4%
126
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
with a secondary school degree, and 1% with a high education degree.
Current education indicators of Roma children and youth imply that
the education system in Serbia is still not on the right track and is
not integrating all Roma students (Figure 14). Roma students living
in Roma settlements are in a worse position; their attendance rate is
somewhat lower than for the majority population, even at the com-
pulsory education levels, such as primary school and the preparatory
preschool programme, while their attendance rate for the non-com-
pulsory but still essential education levels (ECE and secondary edu-
cation) is far below the rate in the mainstream/basic population.
Serbia has a well-developed set of policy measures regarding the inte-
gration of Roma students in mainstream/regular education. Integra-
tion policies in Serbia include the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005-
2015, the EU Strategy for Roma Integration (European Commission,
2020),76 the work of the Roma Education Fund as of 200577, and two
national Strategies for the social inclusion of Roma (2009-2015 and
2016-2025).
As a result of these efforts, the education indicators of Roma have
increased, and numerous Roma professionals are being employed in
schools and preschool institutions (e.g. 175 Roma pedagogical assis-
tants); changing the school ethos and the school-parent communi-
cation wherever they were active, and making desegregation meas-
ures more effective (Daiute & Kovač Cerović, 2017; Kovač Cerović &
Orlandić, 2016). The Government’s report on the achievements of
Roma integration measures is