l emigrant stock in
Canada and United States and certainly make an above-average per-
centage of Serbian emigrants in other Anglo-Saxon countries.
Data on inflows to Anglo-Saxon countries available in the OECD da-
tabase or obtained by SORS via bilateral exchange reveal modest and
essentially stagnant annual flows from Serbia. For example, between
2010 and 2018, the annual gross flow of Serbian migrants to Australia
was between 200 and 300, and to Canada between 250 and 500, with-
out a clear trend. Only the numbers of those migrating to the USA in-
112
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
creased – to around 1,000 annually after 2015 (SORS, 2019). Basically,
neither of these countries would enter the list of top ten gross emigra-
tion flow destinations presented in Section 3. Thus, despite the natural
tendency of high-skilled migrants to emigrate to Anglo-Saxon coun-
tries, and the relatively significant migrant stock there especially due
to large inflow in the 1990s, it seems that Serbia has successfully kept
this tendency in check for the past two decades (Arandarenko, 2021).
The recent available data on Serbian immigrants in Germany, how-
ever, need to be analysed with full attention, given that both the em-
igrant stock and flows to Germany make around a third of the total
stock and flow of Serbian emigrant numbers in the EU. Especially, Ser-
bian public has become very alarmed by the apparent drain of doctors
and medical staff in general, as well as engineers and IT professionals.
Fortunately, some important new analyses as well as the data from
German immigration statistics can be used to try and assess if the up-
ward skill shift has really happened. The first analysis is the IAB study
(Bruecker et al. 2021) on the effects of the Western Balkan Regulation.
Since this regulation eases the employment of workers without
professional qualifications if they have a binding agreement with
a German employer, its expected impact is not in the direction of
higher share of high-skill migrants. This is confirmed by the study’s
main findings. For example, over 40% of those who benefitted from
the regulation got the employment in the construction sector. Fur-
thermore, the average earnings of immigrants admitted under the
scheme are only some 20% higher than minimum wage. It is also in-
dicative that German statistics identifies ten occupational groups as
the most frequent among employees, only one of them high-skilled
(that is, health associate professionals), six in medium-skilled, and
three in low-skilled, as follows: Labourers in mining, construction,
manufacturing and transport; Extraction and building trades work-
ers; Cleaners and helpers;  Health associate professionals; Sales
workers; Personal and protective services workers; Drivers and mo-
bile-plant operators; Metal, machinery and related trades workers;
Personal care workers; Food preparation assistants.
Structure of all emigrants from Serbia in Germany was dominated
by medium-skilled occupations both in 2015 and 2019, with some
increase in share of high-skilled emigrants over that period, but it
remained worse than that in Serbia. Roughly, while the structure of
Serbian resident labour force in 2019 was 20% low-skill, 55% medi-
um-skill and 25% high-skill, in Germany low-skilled workers com-
prised 25% and high-skilled 20% of labour force (Wiiw-ETF, 2021).
Another recent research focused on emigration of health profession-
als to Germany which is the most popular destination for Serbian
health professionals, with Slovenia far below in second place (World
Bank, 2020). According to wiiw-ETF (2021) more than 16% of health
workers from WB6 in Germany are ‘health professionals’, mainly rep-
resented by medical doctors (by more than 70%). The rest consists
of associate health professionals of which the majority is nurses. Al-
though there has been a steady increase in the applications for heal