e of job loss), optimum earnings,
available and developed preschool institutions infrastructure, and
supporting gender equality in the public and private spheres. Exactly
due to insufficient development of institutional mechanisms, selective
labour market, less and less job security, and the gender gap in values,
the postponement of the first birth is probable, and the decision on the
second child is less probable. People who are better educated are more
sensitive to the mentioned imbalances, which leads them to give up
more easily, that is, makes it more difficult for them to decide on having
a second and a subsequent child if the conditions are not favourable.
The existence of evidently higher levels of fertility among the rural
population, as well as among the less educated, indicates that there
is a different framework for making these decisions, which is less de-
pendent on the above factors. We assume that their decisions are made
under the influence of traditional norms, where having the first child
earlier and having more than one child is favoured. At the same time,
we can assume that with further urbanisation and expansion, especial-
ly of higher education, the second group will keep decreasing, so the
challenges of the first will become general challenges.
The gender gap in both employment and earnings still persists. It is
characterised by an increased degree of insecurity of all types of jobs.
More intensive measures are needed to employ women, and reduce the
gap in employment, unemployment, and inactivity rates. It is especially
important to develop employment measures for those with lower levels
of education, i.e. with lower qualifications. The majority in this group
are those who have risky work arrangements, and among them the ma-
jority are women who are temporarily excluded from the labour market.
It is necessary to clearly and legally define all types of work and adapt
them to new circumstances where there are fewer permanent contracts,
and where new, non-standard types of work are emerging (online work-
ers are just one example). Inspectorates should intensify their measures
to monitor employers, and impose fines on those failing to respect the
labour rights. A fast and secure transition from education to the labour
market is a key precondition for gaining financial autonomy for young
people, which enables other transitions, especially family ones.
For a large number of employees, organisational culture does not con-
tribute to balancing work and parenthood, for both men and women.
Neither men nor women are able to adequately balance professional,
parenting, and personal needs. Although there are legal solutions which
allow different types of flexible work engagements, they are very rarely
used in practice and it is left to companies to decide when, how much
and to whom they will make them available. The experience of other
countries shows that if the companies are left to decide which forms of
flexible work engagements to offer, most of the employees usually have
a limited choice. Policies need to be developed towards a broader range
of options and greater accessibility. That is why it is necessary for the
initiative to come “from above”, from the state institutions, where the
promotion of these practices will take place in public administration and
public enterprises (places where they are currently least used and where
there is the greatest need). The work culture should be sensitised to
gender equality, and should especially promote internal policies aimed
at family people, especially fathers, who should be encouraged to take
parental leave and take over part of the daily parental duties at home.
Institutional support to parenting has shown some progress in terms
of a higher degree of involvement of children in preschool institutions,
but coverage is still low and there is a rather selective entrance policy in
preschool institutions. Therefore, it is necessary to further develop the
network of preschoo