196 This nomenclature is part of the EU geocoding standard. It is also known by its French acronym NUTS (Fr. nomenclature des unités territoriales statistiques), and in
Serbia the acronym NSTJ (nomenklatura statističkih teritorijalnih jedinica) is used. There are officially five NUTS2 regions in Serbia, but there are no data for the region
of Kosovo and Metohija (under UN Resolution 1244).
197This is indirectly related to the issue of densities in spatial development, i.e. at the regional level, where the general rule is that higher population densities, as well as the
higher network of cities, settlements and gathering hubs, are more favourable for development, because they help reduce distances, and, usually, also costs.
the circulation of goods, as well as the establishment of common
public transport lines, which significantly increases the networking
on both sides of the border.
According to earlier findings, the proximity of the state border consid-
erably affects the rate of urban decline in Serbia, so cities closer to the
border are usually in considerable shrinkage (Djukić et al., 2017). This
has been confirmed at the European level, where the border areas, i.e.
areas up to 25 kilometres from the nearest state border, are considered
more at risk in terms of development (EUSTAT, 2018). If the 25-kilo-
metre threshold were to be applied to Serbia, almost half of Serbian
cities would be borderline due to the size of the country and relative-
ly long borders, which would not give a clear enough distinction be-
tween the cities themselves. Therefore, the categorisation was done
at 12 kilometres, looking at the distance of the surveyed cities from the
nearest state border.192
By placing the obtained categories in relation to the decline or growth
of the urban population (Fig. 6), the difference in influence between
the old and new borders is noted first.193 Cities closer to the old bor-
ders, i.e. borders established after 1918 with Hungary, Romania and
Bulgaria, were particularly affected by urban shrinkage. Of the four
cities with a population decline of over 5%, as many as three are clos-
est to the border tripoints with these countries: Bor (RS/BG/RO),
Kikinda (RS/HU/RO) and Sombor (RS/HR/HU). Loznica, which is
the only other city belonging to this group, is not close to three bor-
ders, but it is a city whose centre is closest to the state border – only 3
km from the border of Serbia with Bosnia-Herzegovina. On the other
side are the cities on the Novi Sad-Belgrade-Niš central state axis and
along the West Morava, further away from the border and most with
demographic growth. In line with this, it can be concluded that the
negative impact of the city’s proximity to the state border is not only
spatial, but also temporal, since the given boundary was established.
The research can also indicate the favourable influence of border po-
rosity194 for cities closer to the borders of Serbia with Bosnia-Herzego-
vina, Montenegro and North Macedonia.
4.8  Position of a city with respect
to larger cities and in relation to
urban depopulation
Most of international research distinguishes between the shrinking of
larger and smaller cities, where the demographic threshold is mostly
at 100,000 inhabitants.195 In Serbia, this coincides with the difference
between the four larger cities – Belgrade, Novi Sad, Niš and Kraguje-
vac – and medium-sized cities. These four cities are also the unofficial
centres of the statistical NUTS2 regions of Serbia.196 Medium-sized
cities in this research are mostly the most important centres of the
NUTS3 level.
In the former socialist states, single cities as the most susceptible to
urban shrinking are, in addition to transport isolation, also cities fur-
ther away from others, especially larger cities (Restrepo Cadavid et al.,
2017).197 This means that the impact of the distance of one city from its
neighbouring cities, and especially from the closest cities of greater
size and importance, should be redu