g at 4.5 Watts per meter squared in the year 2100. RCP 4.5 is described by the IPCC as an intermediate scenario.
217 For the next 30 years the choice of scenario is not crucial for the assessment of the temperature and precipitation change signals, given that emission scenarios (and
GHG concentrations) are not significantly different in this time frame. The differences between scenarios are more visible for the last decades in 21st century.
218 RCP8.5 is generally taken as the basis for worst-case climate change scenarios.
219 It is expected that there will be no significant changes in total amount of annual precipitation, but according to projections changes in the annual cycle will intensify and
become more visible in comparison with currently observed trends.
220 In the north regions of the country a slight increase in summer precipitation of about 5% can be expected, and in the central and southern regions the decrease in sum-
mer precipitation ranging from -5 to -30 % (Figure 4, right panel).
221 In the future the changes in precipitation distribution intensity towards more frequent heavy precipitation events and higher precipitation accumulations during intense
precipitation events are expected.
222 See also: https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Serbia%20First/Republic_of_Serbia.pdf (accessed 10/02/2022)
212
C H A P T E R 9
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
creased for additional 1,8 billion euros223 in the period 2015-2020. The
impact of climate change endangers public infrastructure, agriculture
productivity, water availability and public health. The most vulnerable
sectors are agriculture, forestry, hydrology and water resources (Draft
Climate Strategy and Action Plan RS, 2019: 10). When it comes to the
health of the population, heat stress is considered to be one of the most
harmful consequences of climate change leading to increase in mortal-
ity and frequency of various diseases (respiratory, cardiovascular, etc.),
especially among old persons. Chronic patients (diabetics, kidney pa-
tients, etc.) are at a highest risk of heat stress, but also residents of cities
where green areas are scarce (Bogdanović et al., 2013).
The unfavourable consequences of climate change especially affect the
poorest, rural areas in Serbia, which accelerates the depopulation pro-
cesses (MUP, 2017). This is especially the case with the least developed
region of Southern and Eastern Serbia, covering a third of the country’s
territory and facing pronounced depopulation trends. The agriculture is
at special risks, mostly from droughts, high temperatures and storms. It
is estimated that losses in agriculture (mostly from decreased corn yield)
amount to 2,2 billion dollars (Djurdjević, 2019; Stričević et al., 2020). De-
crease of agriculture yield destabilises the local economy and can trigger
migration of working-age people looking for a job. With depopulation,
rural areas remain predominantly inhabited by an elderly population
which poses serious challenges to rural development (Igić, 2020: 2-3).
Urban environments are also at risk, especially those prone to floods
and extreme temperatures (Bogdanović et al., 2013; Radulovic et al.,
2015). For instance, extreme weather events in Belgrade have become
more frequent, causing serious and sometimes catastrophic conse-
quences. The urban core of Belgrade is particularly at risk of heat waves,
due to the lack of vegetation, asphalt and concrete coverage and limit-
ed air movement. That said, it should be mentioned that a recent study
warned that Belgrade urgently needed a heat health warning system
(Stanojević et al., 2014). Other research also demonstrates the impor-
tance of digital systems in detecting environmental hazards (via state
The Case of Exceeding Levels of Aflatoxin in
Milk and Climate Change in Serbia
An illustrative example of the socio-economic and political
consequences of climate change i