rough several models: through
full-time employment of both parents, through temporary resigna-
tion or reduction of working hours of one spouse, through increase in
working hours (or through additional jobs) of one (or both) spouses.
These possibilities will depend on the situation on the labour market,
which, like the domestic one, often implies (compulsory) overtime
work, work arrangements which are more insecure (work without a
31 In addition to education, the gradual decline in the universality of marriage (through the growth of divorce rates, single life or widowhood) in the domestic context has
not been accompanied by the growth of extramarital affairs and alternative partnerships, which could be legitimate alternatives to marriage. So, support to earlier finan-
cial and housing independence of young adults could help their partnering transitions as well (Penev, Stanković, 2021: 17).
77
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
contract or under temporary or fixed-term contracts), non-standard
shifts and hours, but also conditioning parenting with employment,
etc. (Aleksić et al. 2020). The resources which are available to varying
degrees in this area are flexible working arrangements, a clear sched-
ule and enough free time, a work culture sensitised towards parenting
and legal solutions related to parenting support (especially parental
leave and days off available to parents).
Two aspects are key to achieving optimum family functioning: 1. ab-
solute requirement — enough time to perform all household tasks 2.
relative requirement — harmonisation of expectations (values related
to gender division of labour) and performance of household tasks be-
tween spouses. Daily tasks which need to be done in the household
include housekeeping (preparing food, cleaning and home mainte-
nance), child care (dressing, feeding, preparing food and cleaning
up after the child, taking children to kindergarten, school or extra-
curricular activities, communication with institutions and learning
support). Most of these tasks need immediate attention and require
daily commitment. The distribution of the schedule dedicated to
these obligations may be influenced by traditional norms where (al-
most) all obligations are assumed by women, and men sometimes
help with them, or contemporary models in which the spouses come
to mutual agreements and participate in everything equally. Spouses
often have the support of their kinship network, somewhat less often
the opportunity to pay a nanny and help at home, and they may have
more or less available nurseries and preschool institutions. The rela-
tive requirement implies the alignment of the values of the spouses
related to the gender division of labour and daily practices. If both
spouses are satisfied with the involvement of the other spouse, then
this optimum is achieved. The optimum may be the result of tradi-
tional norms in which both spouses agree that the division of spheres
is legitimate, or under the influence of contemporary norms in which
both spouses agree that there is no division to male and female tasks.
The optimum is disturbed when there is an incompatibility of expec-
tations between the spouses, that is, when one spouse expects a high-
er degree of involvement of the other in daily duties, which creates
dissatisfaction, stress, disagreement and, potentially, conflict.
An independent household or housing autonomy is seen as one of
the important preconditions for parenting, and especially for further
family expansion. The possibilities of buying real estate or renting one
relatively easyly at affordable prices are very important factors which
young couples think about before starting a family. The type of housing
unit, its size and equipment are related to decisions about childbearing
(see Antonić, 2021), and in that sense they represent a resource which
contributes to the achievement of the desired number of