 were impossible to fit in with
education.84
In order to support human capital development throughout an entire
lifespan and adapt the education system to addressing the needs of
an ageing population, Serbia will need to redevise its LLL system.
That means to focus on creating a more robust system that avoids
fragmentation, embraces online learning strategies and modern con-
textualized blended learning approaches, and, aside from expanding
the offer and rendering it more equitable, speeding up the implemen-
tation of the already established policies (such as recognition of prior
learning, ECTS accumulation, strengthening the connection of edu-
cation and the labor market), and the development of a monitoring
framework for relevant indicators in adult education.
The renewed European agenda has set priorities for the participation
of older learners. In order to achieve progress, concrete objectives
need to be set and the developments closely monitored. Serbia will
also need to invest in broadening the scope/outreach and promotion
among potential participants in adult education, and include them in
career counselling and orientation services. Adult education provid-
ers should offer information, guidance and counselling services on
non-formal and informal learning to help older people better under-
stand the skills they have gained through their life-experience and to
better recognize how these skills can be used.
80 Report on Implementation of SED 2020 Action plan for 2019-2020
81  Blended learning is commonly used as a generic name for a variety of instructional styles, where online education is combined with face to face instruction.
82 Contextualized teaching and learning engages students in active learning while assisting them draw out the meaning from the information they are receiving.
83 Collaborative learning”is an umbrella term for a variety of educational approaches which imply joint intellectual effort by students, or students and teachers together.
Usually, students working in groups of two (or more), mutually searching for understanding, solutions, or meanings, or creating a product.
84 Report on Implementation of SED 2020 Action plan for 2019-2020
130
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
In this chapter we focus on key mechanisms that need to be built up
in order to enable education to maximize impact in strengthening
human capital and the wellbeing of the population in Serbia. More
specifically, we deal with creating an effective teaching force with
competence needed to respond to the challenges, using digitalization
in education, creating a conducive financial and strategic framework
and preventing corruption in education.
4.1  Maximizing the effectiveness
of the teaching force
The status of teachers and policies regulating or developing the
teaching profession are among the most controversial topics in the
education realm of Serbia. Although the quality of teachers is the ma-
jor contributor to the quality of students’ learning outcomes (Hattie,
2008), major controversies are burdening this area in Serbia, creat-
ing serious risks for the future of the country.85 We are listing just the
most obvious ones:
4.1.1	 Teacher salaries
Teacher salaries are a constant topic and their amount has, in turn,
contributed to rendering teaching a non-attractive profession, and to
an overall negative selection of the teaching force working on levels
ISCED 2 and 3. In 2015, teacher salaries were additionally jeopard-
ized by an overall 10% cut in order to consolidate Serbia’s fiscal space.
This cut has not yet been compensated for. Country level averages in
public service are usually used as reference points for teacher sala-
ries. The teaching profession is far more educated than the average
employees in public service, therefore teacher salaries should be
comparable with salaries for professions requiring higher education
qualifications and/or 