with suggested ways to improve them.
factors, especially given the different social contexts in which they
were examined, researchers agree that if a jump in fertility rate is pos-
sible in modern societies, it is possible only through a combination of
different instruments for the work-family balance.
1  Balancing Work and Parenthood
Chart 1. Factors influencing the decision to give birth and private-professional life balance
27 Although the last few years have seen a decline in fertility in most European countries, it is still early to take a position on this phenomenon, i.e. we are not sure whether
it is a new trend or short-term fluctuation.
28 To review domestic demographic research on this topic, readers should consult Rašević (1999, 2006a, 2006b, 2015, 2017), Rašević, Sedlecki (2016), Rašević, Vasić
(2017), Rašević et al., (2017), Rašević, Galjak (2022), Penev, Stanković (2018, 2021), Nikitović (2019) and others.
Private-professional
life balance
Relationship between spouses
Parenting cultures and gender values
Institutional support
Job market and organisational culture
75
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
We have divided the factors influencing the possibility of such a balance
into four groups: 1. The labour market, which includes employment, un-
employment, inactivity, job security (type of contract), income level;
and organisational culture, which includes types of work arrangements
which are (are not) conducive to balancing work and parenting, values
and practices within the work organisation, and the level of exposure
to discrimination in employment and work faced by (future) parents;
2. Institutional support to parenthood, which includes financial incen-
tives — one-off and continuous payments, and services — parental
leave, etc.; 3. Marital dynamics consisting of: a) degree of marital satis-
faction, b) degree of marital stability, c) harmonisation of gender roles
and expectations — division of domestic work and division of parental
care; 4. Dominant  gender roles values related to the roles of men and
women in the public and private spheres.
1.1 Deciding on giving birth
The decision to have a child is one of the longest-term decisions an in-
dividual or couple can make, and therefore implies a certain predicta-
bility of future life, that is, security and harmonisation of marital roles
(Thomson, Henz 2005), income certainty, and security of parental
support (institutional and informal). When there is a high degree of
freedom in deciding with whom, when and how many children to
have, and when there are enough resources available to achieve the
optimum for their children, family and themselves, there is a chance
that people will have the desired number of children. This decision in
Serbia is largely influenced by the familistic norm (Tomanović, et al.
2016). 29 Young people affirm that they are exposed to a certain pres-
sure from the environment, parents and friends regarding the time
for having a child and the desired number of children. In addition,
they feel that they do not have adequate institutional support and suf-
ficient personal resources to facilitate the family transition. Despite
that, the majority of the Serbian population highly values family life,
marriage and children, and parenthood is a very important part of
personal identity (Rašević, 2006; Rašević 1999; Tomanović Ignja-
tović, 2004; Pešić Jenaćković, Marković Krstić, 2021).
The decrease in fertility, which characterises the second half of the
20th century, is associated with delaying childbirth for later years,
and is associated with structural and cultural factors. The structure
of the labour market is especially important because today we re-
cord higher fertility rates in highly developed countries where there
are high female employment rates and where jobs are (highly) se-
cure (Thenevon, 2015). Another important factor is the institution-
al context w