f PDI contributions, insured persons become eligible for an old-age pension and health insurance in old age; in the event of death, their heirs may be
eligible for a survivor pension and a one-off funeral grant; in case of disability, insured persons with only a few years of pensionable service are eligible for a disability
pension, and potentially also for a physical disability benefit and LTC benefit.
155 In its LTC plans, the UK expressly refers to improving efforts to attract immigrants in order to meet workforce needs (European Commission, 2019:498).
156 For more details see UN specialized agency for ITCs website https://www.itu.int/hub/2020/02/from-robots-to-virtual-reality-4-ways-tech-can-improve-seniors-lives/
157 Rosmino, C. (2019, October 29),  https://www.euronews.com/next/2019/10/29/japan-leads-the-way-with-elderly-care.
175
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
3.3  Introduction of dedicated LTC
insurance
The option of introducing a dedicated contribution to fund both cash
benefits and LTC services would, to a substantial extent, solve the
problems of fragmentation, inconsistent criteria and absence of co-
ordination between the health and social sectors. Some authors ar-
gue that there is a stronger rationale for meeting the growing needs
of the elderly through social insurance, and that, if tax-financed, LTC
stands little chance in the competition for public funds with other
sectors (Barr, 2010).
158 Data taken from Tim za socijalno uključivanje i smanjenje siromaštva Vlade Republike Srbije (2020), available in an Excel spreadsheet.
159 Although the at-risk-of-poverty rate of the total population is higher only in Romania, the at-risk-of-poverty rate of old persons (65+) is higher in 8 countries, and in
Estonia and Latvia it is over 40%. (Eurostat, code ilc_li02)
The key weakness of this option is that, in Serbia, a new contribution
cannot be introduced at the expense of existing ones, in view of the
shortage of funds for pensions and health care. Raising the total so-
cial contributions level is unacceptable too, as it would drive labour
costs further up.
Further deliberation on the introduction of dedicated LTC insurance
would certainly require an in-depth analysis of experiences from Ger-
many and Slovenia, as well as experts’ rationale for dismissing this
idea in Austria (European Commission, 2019).
Old-age poverty reduction is chiefly ensured within the pension
system through universal pensions or the institution of minimum
pension, depending on welfare state type. Further, almost all EU
countries award specific social benefits to older persons outside the
pension system, especially those with Bismarckian traditions (Euro-
pean Commission, 2021).
In recent years, new measures and instruments for more compre-
hensive protection of the older people have been introduced (Euro-
pean Commission, 2021); in the long term, there is a notable threat
of growing old-age poverty, given the prevalence of atypical and
non-standard jobs, part-time work, employment instability, young
people’s increasingly delayed labour market entry, and in some cases
also widespread grey economy. According to the OECD, part of the
solution lies in equal treatment of all workers in terms of coverage,
contribution rates and pension entitlements, which would also re-
duce the incentive for employers to increase non-standard employ-
ment (OECD, 2019). Social pensions are also part of the solution.
4.1  Situation in Serbia
In Serbia, the proportion of older persons (65+) who are vulnerable
ranges from 8%, according to the absolute consumption poverty in-
dicator,158 to 21.1%, according to the at-risk-of-poverty rate (AROP).
According to the former criterion, old-age poverty is only slightly
above the average (poverty incidence of 7%), while according to the
latter, they fare somewhat better than the general population (AROP
of 23.2%). Pensioners aged 65+ are less