tive potential and mortality. Children’s nutrition
status reflects their overall health. When children have access to ad-
equate food, are not exposed to frequent illness, and are well cared
for, they reach their growth potential and are considered well-nour-
ished. On the other hand, malnutrition is associated with nearly half
of all child deaths worldwide. Children suffering from malnutrition
are more likely to die from common childhood ailments, and those
who survive fall ill more often and experience faltering/slow growth.
Three-quarters of children who died from causes related to malnu-
trition only had mild or moderate forms of malnutrition, meaning
they showed little outward sign of their vulnerability. Malnutrition is
not the only aspect of nutrition that has health implications. The re-
sults of numerous studies that have dealt with nutritional status have
shown that the phenomenon of obesity in childhood and adolescence
is the best indicator of the burden of risk factors for the development
of chronic non-communicable diseases later in life. Obesity is close-
ly linked to other risk factors (diet and physical inactivity) (WHO,
2022d).
The results of the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) con-
ducted in 2019 showed that the prevalence of child malnourishment
(moderate and severe) in Serbia as a whole is relatively low. Indica-
tors of nutrition status from 2019 show a better picture in comparison
to 2014 and 2010 (Chart 2) (SORS & UNICEF, 2021).105
The Roma population, which is among the most vulnerable in Eu-
rope, especially in the Republic of Serbia, is often exposed to discrim-
ination, social marginalization and poverty, which also leads to less
access to health services. The nutritional status of children under the
age of five living in Roma settlements shows a less favourable situa-
tion than in the general population. In 2019, 7.3% of children under
the age of 5 were malnourished, 22.6% were stunted in growth, 3.4%
were stunted in weight in relation to height, and 9.7% were obese.
Compared to 2014 and 2010, almost all indicators of nutrition (except
obesity) are favourable in this population (Chart 2), but still much less
favourable than in relation to the general population.
In order to improve the nutritional status of the Roma population,
both health education and the health system need to be strength-
ened. In the broader sense, the overall socio-economic status of
Roma families’ needs to be improved - by educating parents, through
schooling, preventing early marriages and empowering family plan-
ning. Regular monitoring of child nutrition indicators is necessary in
order to better plan initiatives intended for children. Given that the
risk of obesity in the later years of childhood and adolescence is often
established in the early stages of life, it is important to pay necessary
attention to the obesity that occurs in early life. Combating obesity
and providing better services for children require a multi-sectoral ap-
proach, in particular cooperation between the education and health
systems. Malnutrition in Roma children requires additional attention
outside the health system in order to resolve the issue of food avail-
ability, hygiene, and other socioeconomic determinants that affect
health outcomes.
3  Lifestyles
105 Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia and UNICEF. 2019. Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey in the Republic of Serbia. Final Report. Belgrade, Serbia: Statistical Office
of the Republic of Serbia and UNICEF.
146
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
14.0%
16.0%
18.0%
2.1%
2.0%
1.2%
9.8%
8.3%
7.3%
4.3%
5.0%
3.1%
15.6%
13.9%
13.4%
2010
2014
2019
Underweight
Stunting
Wasting
Overweight
Chart 1. Nutrition status among children under the age of 5
Among adults, malnourishment and obesity, and related non-com-
municable diseases represent not only a health but also an