 rural
development, where the position of small and medium-sized cities is
especially emphasised as a link between larger cities and rural hinter-
land. The development and vibrancy of these cities and their gravitat-
ing rural surroundings are closely dependent (UN, 2019).
According to the same report (UN, 2019), Europe as a continent is
among the most urbanised parts of the Earth. Urbanisation in Europe
began in the late 19th century and many cities reached their growth
peak decades ago. Hence, the challenges of urban development are
different here than at the level of most of the world, where urban
growth is still present and accompanied by different challenges, such
as unplanned construction, excessive social polarisation in cities or
lagging behind in urban infrastructure development.
Today, Europe is the continent with the most evident urban shrink-
age162 phenomenon. Urban shrinkage is considered to be a series of
mostly unfavourable and interconnected development trends at the
level of one city. Depopulation, i.e. the loss of urban population, is
the most important feature of this phenomenon (Pallagst, 2008).
Population decline has even been crucial to establishing an appropri-
ate research framework in recent decades – the concept of shrinking
cities. The reason for shaping the concept is that, for the first time in
urbanisation, there is a mass occurrence of the peacetime decline of
cities that are losing population relatively slowly and evenly due to
the decline of the local economy, and not as a result of wars, extreme
political crises or natural disasters such as earthquakes, floods and
droughts. According to recent data, about 20% of the world’s major
cities are losing population (Wolff & Wiechmann, 2018). In Europe,
this is even more pronounced as, at the beginning of the third mil-
1  Introduction: Shrinking Cities as a Key Spatial
Element Of Depopulation
162 This phenomenon is common in Japan, the United States, and, more recently, in China.
181
C H A P T E R 8
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
The analysis of the shrinkage of medium-sized cities was conducted
on the basis of several criteria derived from the described factors of
urban shrinkage. They have been selected so that local features of ur-
ban shrinkage can be seen through them. The criteria are:
The basic research unit is a medium-sized city in terms of an urban
area as a uniquely built-up area168. For the analysis of urban shrink-
2  Methodology
lennium, almost half of the major European cities163 were losing their
population (Turok & Mykhnenko, 2007). Most of them were in its
eastern half, that is, in the former socialist countries, where it has
become the predominant urbanisation pattern. Thus, according to
data from several years ago, about 75% of Eastern European cities
lost their population, and in the case of Romania and Bulgaria, that
percentage was even above 90% (Restrepo Cadavid et al., 2017).
Although a the decline of one city is easily seen through its depopula-
tion, the very phenomenon of urban shrinkage is much more complex
(Haase et al., 2014). Problems in the restructuring of the urban econo-
my are most often quoted as the cause of urban shrinkage, while other
important factors are the limitations imposed by administrative and
territorial division, i.e. the impact of borders and zones of influence,
changing demographic, social and environmental patterns at the lo-
cal, regional or national level and accessibility and networking issues
(Martinez-Fernandez et al., 2012). Since all socio-economic phenom-
ena are reflected in the urban space, these cities are visually and func-
tionally shrinking, their urban space is more neglected, and there are
empty or half-empty buildings and unused and unmaintained urban
land and infrastructure. Such an environment often encourages fur-
ther depopulation. Due to this interdependence of factors, it is some-
times very difficult