a-
tions emerged, such as rich Middle Eastern countries and China, but
migration data on them are scarce.
In the rest of this section, after a brief detour to economic theories of
migration, which we need as a useful framework for analysis, we look
closer at the most recent trends regarding the outflows of Serbian mi-
grants to the EU.
3.2  Economic theories of migration
and their operationalization
Among many, mostly complementary, theories of migration (neo-
classical, new economics, mobility transition, institutional, systems
and networks, segmented labour markets, world systems, conflict
etc.) the first two are especially useful in providing a simple dynamic
framework to understand the features and the evolution of migration
from Serbia.
The neoclassical theory of migration (NTM assumes that economies
and labour markets converge in the long run through trade and mi-
gration. Migrants act as rational actors driven by economic motives.
They move from poorer countries where labour is abundant and wag-
es are low, to richer countries where labour is scarce and wages are
high. Within this framework, migration is implicitly seen as perma-
nent, typically lifetime decision of an individual migrant based on
pre-calculated positive net present value of migration.
Basically, NTM is the theory of human capital investment applied to
migration decisions (Sjaastad, 1962). One practical consequence of
interest is that the permanent migrants’ ties with the home country
tend to weaken with the passage of time.
The second approach is so-called new economics of labour migra-
tion (NELM) as developed by Lucas and Stark, (1985) and Stark and
Bloom (1985). This approach views individual migration as part of a
household utility maximization strategy and as typically temporary
or circular phenomenon. The household in a way sends the migrant
abroad as a part of its risk-optimization (‘hedging’) strategy. At
around the time this theory was developed, short-haul, shorter-term
migration (e.g. Mexicans to the US; Southern Europeans to Western
Europe etc.) gained in importance.
In our simplified re-interpretation, the neoclassical migration theory
is about the migration of people, while the new economics of labour
migration is about the migration of workers. Of course, individual mi-
grants do not have to decide and know in advance for how long they
would migrate and whether they would return or not; life often takes
unexpected course and would-be temporary workers become ’peo-
ple’ in the process, and vice versa.However, the reasons for migration
are of interest for policy and variation over time in the distribution of
migration by category and country may in part explain differences in
Serbian emigrants’ economic and social outcomes and the macroe-
conomic, labour market and demographic impact of emigration.
3.3  Flows
Having an idea about the ratio between the migrant stock and gross
migration flows should provide some insights into which one of the
3  People or Workers?
105
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
two above sketched economic theories of migration could be consid-
ered to better reflect the reality and whether their relative importance
in explaining migration trends have changed in the recent period.
Table 2 below compares the flow and stock data for twelve most im-
portant destination countries within the ‘Eurostat-Europe’ in 2010
and 2019. Six of these countries are traditional destinations (5 OMS
– Germany, France, Italy, Austria, Sweden; and Switzerland), while
seven are new destinations (Czech Republic, Slovakia, Croatia, Slo-
venia, Malta, Hungary and Poland). The full data for years 2010-2019
are presented in Annex, Table A1.
The annual gross inflows of Serbian immigrants to the EU-28 as a
whole almost tripled between 2010 and 2019, while at the same time
the immigrant stock decreased according to Concept 1, or remained
unchanged (that is, increase