 2019 and 2020, respectively) (RZS, 2021b). The
volatile nature of average wage growth calls for caution and suggests
that, if implemented, the separation of valorisation and indexation
parameters should not be drastic (the former to wages only, and the
latter to prices only) to avoid creating wide disparities in pension lev-
els between old and new pensioners.
An additional possibility to be considered is abandoning the average
wage criterion and relying on the wage bill as a parameter, which ac-
counts for employment development as well, thus better reflecting
any impact of population ageing on the labour market. Owing to dif-
ferences in contributions paid in Serbia depending on type of employ-
ment, the contributions bill may, in fact, be an even better choice. As
both Serbia’s wage bill and contributions bill may grow independent-
ly of productivity growth, it also makes sense to include the GDP
growth rate, in particular as a trigger governing the application of one
indexation parameter or the other. The GDP is currently taken into
account only in terms of indicating the desirable share of pension ex-
penditures (11%). The parameter of price index could be reviewed as
well in terms of identifying a consumer basket more relevant from
the aspect of pensioners’ living standard. These options should be ex-
plored further, together with an assessment of their impact on both
fiscal sustainability and pension adequacy.
2.2.2	 Retirement age and effective
retirement age
An obvious solution to ensure both adequate pensions and system
sustainability in the face of population ageing is longer working
lifespan. Serbia’s legal retirement age, which currently stands at 65
years for men and 63 for women, is not low in comparative terms
(EPC-SPC, 2020:11), especially given that life expectancy at 65 in
Serbia lags behind the EU average. It should be stressed that sever-
al EU countries have already opted for further gradual increases of
this threshold; however, these changes are assessed as insufficient to
compensate for life expectancy gains among old persons in the long
run (EPC-SPC, 2020:4).
In present-day Serbia, it is worth reflecting on retirement age provi-
sions primarily in the context of a possible automatic link to life ex-
pectancy gains. Eight EU-28 countries have already included such
provisions in their systems (EPC-SPC, 2020:13). The advantage of
automatic rules stems from the fact that discretionary decisions to
raise the retirement age tend to be politically unpopular. On the other
hand, absence of social dialogue and even undemocratic character of
such rules are inevitably highlighted as disadvantages (OECD, 2019).
In the post-COVID world, the introduction of automatic links may
need to be re-evaluated.
An alternative to automatic link is a strategic commitment to define
indicators whose change would trigger a review of the current retire-
ment age. Besides life expectancy gains for older persons, healthy life
years, older workers’ disability and health status, proportion of work-
ers in physically demanding jobs etc. should be taken into consid-
eration. The review should include an impact assessment of raising
the retirement age on different groups of employees, in view of life
expectancy differences between men and women, as well as any dif-
ferences between high and low-income earners etc.137 If an automatic
rule is to be introduced, it is also necessary to specify a relationship
most appropriate in our circumstances. In some countries, for each
year of life expectancy gains for older persons (65), the retirement age
is raised by one year, and in some – by less (e.g. 2/3 of a year).
It must, however, be emphasised that nothing is achieved by con-
stantly raising the (statutory) retirement age if early retirement op-
tions remain available, including through accelerated or disability
pensions. In Serbia, in 2019, despite reforms aimed at reducing early
retirement, new old-age pensioners’ average length of pensionab