 one million of Serbian citizens residing abroad in the mid-2020
(United Nations, 2020). We believe the real size of emigrant stock
originating from Serbia is closer to this upper bound given the known
limitations of census methodology19 in this aspect (Reynaud, Niki-
tović & Tucci, 2017).
There are only a few studies that have offered an estimate of the an-
nual migration inflows and outflows to/from Serbia according to the
definitions of the United Nations (UN) and the EC Regulation No
862-2007 (Kupiszewski et al., 2012; Lukić, et al., 2013; UNFPA Serbia,
2019; Nikitović, 2019). These are based on the migration statistics of
the countries that are main destinations of the Serbian citizens. The
basic limitation of such estimates is methodological in its nature. In
practice, it is not possible to collect statistically relevant data from all
destination countries either because they are not available, or their
quality is debatable. The latter is common in the case of countries
where Serbian citizens make up a very small share of immigrants. Ad-
ditionally, longer time series on migration flows related to the citizens
of Serbia are not available due to frequent changes of its borders in
the period 1991-2008.
The result is a data series shorter than a decade, which strongly af-
fects the quality of conclusions about the trends in international mi-
gration flows from/to the present-day territory of Serbia. Finally, it is
a well-known fact that the numbers on deregistered immigrants are
often highly underestimated across the reports of statistical offices,
particularly those in the most popular destination countries. This
factor is becoming increasingly important as the share of short-term
migration flows in the total migration rises.
Given the listed limitations of the migration flow statistics, we have
relied on a single source as the best possible approximation of the net
migration flows between Serbia and the most important destination
countries – the annual ‘snapshot’ (on 31 December of each year) of
administratively based statistics of valid residence permits with du-
ration of at least 12 months issued to Serbian citizens in the EU and
EFTA countries (Eurostat, 2021a). The recent report on the estimate
of net international migration for Serbia, produced by the Statistical
Office of the Republic of Serbia and UNFPA Serbia (2019), served to
adjust and correct figures from diverse data sets on foreigners avail-
able from different national sources including migration of our cit-
izens to large countries outside the EU. The total net emigration in
the period between 30 Sep 2011 (the Census Day) and 31 Dec 2020, in
accordance with the concept of usually resident population applied in
the 2011 Census, was estimated to −46,612 people. This suggests that
net emigration from Serbia is fairly lower than is typically reported in
the media, particularly due to the rising share of short-term tempo-
rary and circular migration in the recent period even in the traditional
emigration countries, such as Germany (for more details on method-
19 Recent censuses in Serbia have significantly underestimated the number of Serbian emigrants as their focus were not on those residing abroad for more than a year but
on the population usually residing in the country. Emigrants were not interviewed directly, thus a lot of them could not be covered only by interviewing their relatives or
neighbours residing in the country.
ology used to estimate the balance of international migration of Ser-
bia in this report, see Arandarenko, 2021).
1.5.2	 Internal migration
Frequent changes of political borders in the region of former Yugosla-
via since 1991 affected the availability and quality not only of the sta-
tistics on international but also on internal migration in Serbia. Also,
about 200 thousand of internally displaced persons who fled from the
region of Kosovo and Metohija during and after the NATO military
campaign in 1999 (Commissariat for Refugees and Mi