ermany
since 2015. Thus, the increased first-time inflows into Germany are
not translating into growing stocks of short-term migrants staying for
less than 4 years.
The German statistics on Serbian migrant flows contain one special
type of temporary migrants – asylum seekers, who are most often
very poor people attracted by otherwise meagre pocket money ben-
efits available to migrants as well as the possibility to work informally
while waiting for the processing of their asylum applications that al-
most invariably end up being rejected. For Serbian migrants in Ger-
many, asylum seeking is usually the most frequent reason within the
’other reasons’ heading. A paper analysing asylum migrants around
2015 found out that about 4,000 Serbian illegal asylum seekers res-
ident in Germany at the time waited for their application to be pro-
cessed for 15 months, on average. Besides, they were educationally
clearly negatively selected (Guichard, 2020).
This analysis shows that rapidly increased flows in the 2016-2019
period did not translate into growing stock of recent Serbian immi-
grants. While the annual inflow increased from 10,263 in 2016 to
21,619 in 2019, the stock of those with residence shorter than 4 years
increased by less than 2,000, or less than 10% of cumulative increase
in flows over the same period. Still, the bulk of that modest increase
happened between 2018 and 2019. Thus, one cannot exclude the pos-
sibility of a reversal of the relatively favourable trend of dominantly
temporary migration into Germany.
Despite the manifold increase in flows and stocks during the last
decade permanent migration potential of NMS remains very limited.
The NMS do not actively follow the policy of permanent migration /
naturalization, except for foreign nationals who belong to their own
ethnicity. Besides, the NMS are largely not recognized as desirable
permanent or long-term destinations for potential Serbian migrants,
with partial exception of Slovenia.
Table 6 provides empirical confirmation for these points. Overall,
there has been a declining trend in acquisition of EU citizenship by
Serbian citizens since 2010. Over the entire period, the NMS granted
less than 10% of total citizenships granted by the EU countries to Ser-
bians, with lion’s share going to Hungary, Croatia and Slovenia. On the
other hand, over the last decade, the naturalization of Serbians sharp-
ly dropped in Switzerland, France and the United Kingdom, was flat
in Germany and Austria, and strongly increased in Italy and Sweden.
Different annual naturalization rates (defined as share of naturalized
Serbian nationals in the total stock of Serbian nationals in the desti-
nation country) also reflect the naturalization policies of the recipient
countries, especially their attitudes toward dual citizenship. The most
important destinations for Serbian migrants - Germany, Austria and
Switzerland - are restrictive in that regard and stick to the principle of
’avoidance of multiple nationalities’. This results in low rates of natu-
ralization. For example, the average naturalization rate for Germany
in the last decade was less than 1.5% annually. On the other hand, the
average naturalization rate for Sweden is about 7%.
The data for Hungary apparently refer to resident citizenships only,
since the number of citizenships granted to Serbian citizens of Hun-
garian ethnic extraction after 2011 when Hungary introduced a new
permissive law on citizenship exceeds 90,000. As a further compli-
cation, if these Serbian residents with dual Hungarian citizenship
migrate elsewhere in the EU they will invariably be recorded as Hun-
garians because of employment and residence privileges they enjoy
as citizens of an EU member state.
In this section, we attempt to provide reasonable explanations for
the overall and structural migration outcomes in the past decade
observed and presented in the previous section, by connecting them
to features of the Serbian labour market and labour force t