 the economy and education, urban infrastruc-
ture, fiscal capacities, etc.). These inequalities are correlated with the
geographical position of the towns and their connection with their
surroundings and the principal roads in the country.
Domestic and comparative European experiences show that different
measures can have a positive effect on urban development. Towns lo-
cated on the main roads are declining more slowly, so the construc-
tion of the road network and better traffic connectivity of towns is one
of the measures that reduces regional depopulation. Opening of new
border crossings boosts the local economic and social life of border
areas, while active urban strategies such as thematisation of towns
and better use of public space and buildings contribute to towns
adapting to new demographic circumstances. European experience
shows that the development of universities as one of the higher func-
tions of the city, and “studentification”, have a positive effect on the
development of other higher functions of the city and demographic
development. In towns in which new universities have been estab-
lished, such as Kosovska Mitrovica and Novi Pazar, the demographic
picture is far better (although other factors are also at work). How-
ever, the decentralisation and deconcentration of administrative and
other public functions are especially important, as they will enable
the development of the tertiary and quaternary sectors and make
towns in Serbia more attractive for living (Antonić, 2022). This delays
or reverses the economic and social decline of the towns, slows down
internal and external migrations and raises the quality of life of both
the town and its rural hinterland. All parts of this report strongly point
to the negative consequences of centralisation in a number of areas,
from administration to the economy, and emphasise that one of the
solutions is decentralisation and deconcentration.
The decline of medium-sized towns is a key issue for the future demographic and overall development of Serbia. These towns need to
develop higher-order urban functions in the economy, services, culture, trade, and education. This approach would lead to a more bal-
anced regional development.
The decline in fertility was influenced by structural and cultural changes, including increased gender equality. Today, however, developed
European societies with a higher degree of gender equality (at the level of attitudes and in practice) often have higher fertility rates. This is the
point at which traditional discourse focused on patriarchal values and high birth rates overlap with modernist discourse on gender equality.
But society must be ready to support both modern families, which are characterised by equality of men and women, and traditional ones.
23
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Reduced fertility is one of the key factors in depopulation. The de-
cline in fertility is influenced by cultural changes that place greater
emphasis on issues of self-realisation, identity and life satisfaction,
but also structural changes that occurred when women entered the
labour market and achieved new freedoms in the public arena. The
equalisation of men and women in the public sphere went hand in
hand with undermining traditional views on women’s primary role in
raising children and caring for the family. Gender equality, in a way, is
part of the formula for the problem of low fertility. However, gender
equality may also be part of the solution formula.
Satisfaction with the quality of life and the relationship between spous-
es is one of the factors that contribute to higher birth rates (VRS, 2018).
Satisfaction with the relationship depends, as Human Development Re-
port highlights, on the harmonisation of gender roles and expectations.
Attitudes on gender roles are changing and the differences between
men and women, especially those highly educated, 