ation will take up 2.8% of the budget,
while only 0,03% is intended for professional development of both
preschool and primary school teachers.
Such an allocation plan will actually halt every development-orient-
ed activity. To corroborate this prediction, the financial justification
of SED 2030 states that, for 2022 and 2023, there will be no need for
increasing the educational budget for development. All additional
costs will be covered from international grants and loans, and an
increase of the GDP share allocated for education is not planned.
SED 2030 only mentions that the aim should be not do decrease it
even more.
4.3.3	 Non-implementation of discussed
and prepared new financing
The school education system is financed in a traditional way – based
on the calculation of approved school classes and teachers. Innova-
tions in terms of introducing a per capita student funding scheme and
financing formula that would allocate a higher coefficient for schools
in remote areas, and for students from vulnerable groups, have nev-
er materialized although all calculations and piloting was prepared
during the first decade of the 2000’s, although this was provided for
by the 2009 Law on the Foundations of the Education System and
implementation planned to start from 2013. After several initiatives
and projects, the funding formula still remains the same. Also, grant
schemes for innovations are implemented only as part of donor pro-
jects or loans, never from the budget.
SED 2030 provides for a feasibility study for the intersectoral fi-
nancing of inclusive education and a new model of higher education
financing. This new model of higher education financing, as de-
scribed, should be focused on increasing quality through incentives
for excellent students, scholarships for low SES students and more
funds for HEI infrastructure.
4.4  Increasing education integrity
All measures aiming to maximize their impact on education can eas-
ily collapse in a context where corruption and integrity violations
occur. Corruption in education is not merely a governance issue – it
directly or indirectly affects the effectiveness of adopted policies and
quality of learning outcomes. It also threatens the equity of education,
trust of stakeholders in education, and their motivation to engage in
education (OECD, 2012). Education is rarely at the forefront in big
corruption cases, but illicit and illegal activities, corruptive practice,
bribery, favouritism, nepotism, conflict of interest are frequent and
common phenomena that seriously jeopardize the integrity of ed-
ucation (Hallak & Poisson, 2007). Occasionally, there are cases of
major fraud, such as the purchasing of diplomas or certificates, as
well as plagiarism at high level, which bring greater public attention.
Corruptive practices usually become part of informal policy and are
used to bypass or compensate some systemic shortcomings or lack of
resources. Often unrecognized, they mask the real problems in the
education system’s functioning, and cause the collapse of all resource
investments (financial, human, infrastructural, etc.). Therefore, in
the context of the challenges created by depopulation, it is essential
to take corruption in education into account. This can contain sever-
al warnings, pointing to factors ranging from diminishing the effects
of the efforts for human capital development, through reducing the
quality and equity of education, to having an impact on mobility, i.e.
instigating the emigration of better educated professionals.
Serbia has strengthened its anti-corruption systems by signing the
UN Convention against Corruption. However, progress is slow and
the implementation of existing legislation, policies and oversight by
relevant public bodies remains weak. Serbia’s position according to
the Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index is re-
peatedly weak, and further declining in recent years. In 2021 Serbia
ranked lowest to date, as 96th out of 180 countrie