 efficiency and quality. Evidence collected so far gives us a good
idea in which areas we need to prioritize interventions. Those are, un-
doubtedly, the quality of teaching and teachers, relevance of our curric-
ulum, and alleviating underachievement at all levels through compre-
hensive support to students. In the next section we shall be discussing
the possible policy options which ought to be explored further.
3.2  How can the education
system compensate for the losses
incurred by demographic changes?
In this chapter we discuss the neglected education opportunities of
key target groups: the growing body of adults, young children at the
age when education has the highest return, students from a low so-
cio-economic background, vulnerable groups hitherto partially ex-
cluded from education, and children living in remote rural areas that
are increasingly depopulated. We analyse current trends, highlight
missing links, and suggest policies and measures that have the poten-
tial for major impact and positive change.
3.3  Preschool education brings
wide-ranging social and
economic benefits for individuals
and for society
Early years are a period of intensive neuro-psychological development
of a child. Developmental delays before the age of six are difficult to
compensate for later in life because early childhood is a particularly
sensitive period for brain formation (Naudeau et al., 2011). Children
who participated in high-quality early childhood education and care
(ECEC) were better prepared for school and tended to have higher
achievement at school in maths, reading and had better memory (Eury-
dice, 2009; Ivić & Pešikan, 2009, Havnes & Mogstad, 2009). There is
a specific span of time, when the development of certain types of abil-
ities develop particularly fast (Cook & Cook, 2009), e.g. language and
cognitive development are especially important during the first six
months to three years of life and continues later in preschool settings
(WHO, 2009).  So, deriving from all these facts, there is a broad con-
sensus that investing in the earliest phase of education brings the great-
est economic and social returns over the lifecycle, particularly in the
case of disadvantaged children. It helps to avoid later, more expensive
and often less effective remedial actions (Heckman, 2015).
Expanding the access to preschool education has been a stable policy
priority in Serbia from the early 2000s, the effects of which have start-
ed to yield results recently, but numbers are still far from expectations.
The coverage of children in preschool education is increasing over time
in all age groups, but is far from the Education and Training 202069 (ET
2020) or 2030 benchmark. The coverage of children from 6 months to
age 3  increases to 28.1% in 2019 (Figure 9). The coverage of children
from age 3 to 5.5 by preschool education also increases (Figure 10). In
2019, it was 66.4%. At the same time, the participation rate in early
childhood education and care (ECEC) at EU level in 2019, for pupils
from age 4 to the age of starting compulsory education at primary level
was 95.7%.70 Despite the continuous increase in the participation rate,
the coverage is still far below many comparators. It is also below the
target values of the 2020 Strategy for Education Development in Ser-
bia (coverage between the ages of 4 and 6 should be doubled and full
coverage by the preschool programme achieved), and EU benchmark
(96% of children above age 4), and especially the new ET 2030 bench-
mark of 96% of 3-year-olds being included in organized early educa-
tion and care programs (Eurydice, 2019; EC, 2021).
Equity remains a significant concern, as will be discussed in the next
sections.  Only 10.5 % of children from the poorest quintile and 7%
from the Roma population are enrolled in educational institutions.71
Preschools are open to enrolment for all children, but this applies in cas-
es where there is  sufficient accommodation capacity. If there is compe-
titio