or long-term planning, and in addition, a precarious
position in the labour market makes it difficult to harmonise their pro-
fessional and family life. The very fact that they do not have the oppor-
tunity to exercise these rights indicates their low bargaining potential
with employers when it comes to other family obligations — days off,
parental leave (especially among men), sick leave for children, etc.
Trend analyses show a gradual reduction in non-compliance with
workers’ rights (Charts A8 and A9 in the Annex) and the risks associ-
ated with the extreme uncertainties of employees since 2016. Howev-
er, there is still a significant number, especially of young people who
81
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
are just entering the sphere of work, who fail to exercise their rights
and achieve the conditions for long-term planning, planning that re-
quires certainty of income and employment.
2.2	 Organisational culture
Organisational culture has two dimensions: values and organisation of
work. Values in enterprises can support parental responsibilities, to a
greater or lesser extent. They could interpret parental responsibilities
in the traditional way, where daily care is primarily the responsibility of
women, or in the modern way where men are equally involved, so em-
ployers should offer equal treatment to both parents. Organisation of
work can be more or less flexible, i.e. where employees can have more
or less autonomy over the work schedule and hours.
Domestic organisational culture is not sufficiently sensitised to paren-
tal responsibilities, especially the responsibilities of men as involved
parents. Values which dominate in companies imply a distinct distance
of power (hierarchical leadership and decision-making), collectivist
values (Mitić et al., 2016; Mojić, 2020) and a relatively low level of ac-
ceptance of gender equality (Mojić, 2018). The transition to a market
economy has further shifted value orientations towards the so-called
male values which, as positive characteristics of employees, emphasise
domination, ambition, results orientation, etc. (Hodges, Budig, 2010).
Neo-liberal values which emphasise profit and efficiency have called
into question the socialist legacy aimed at special protection of women
and mothers at work, and with the gradual domination of the economic
sector, lowered the general sensitivity of work culture towards family
obligations. Such work culture relies on the domination of patriarchal
and authoritarian value orientations  among the general population,
which further legitimises the division of gender spheres and inequality
of power (Pešić, Stanojević, 2021; Pešić, 2017; Stanojević, 2018).35 On
the other hand, the growing presence of male values, with the absence
of adequate controls in the labour market, carries with it special risks
of discrimination against women who want to give birth, as well as the
risk that their job will not wait for them after maternity leave (Tomano-
vić, et al., 2016).
The extent to which parents will be able to harmonise work with par-
enthood depends on the options available to them when organising
work: type of employment, freedom of organising their working sched-
ule, work flexibility, etc. If these options are more diverse and allow for
a higher degree of individualised organisation of time, it is more likely
that balance will be established, and both work tasks and family re-
sponsibilities performed better. Giving up the desired number of chil-
dren in the domestic context is usually a consequence of the inability
to harmonise work and parenthood. When both parents are working,
they often point out that there is no one to look after the child/children,
or that they do not have enough time to devote to their children to the
extent they need. Overtime work, or inadequate working hours and
Chart 4. Share of employed people by sex and age who do not exercise the righ