calculated
as extreme cases for sensitivity analysis) with otherwise equal as-
sumptions on future fertility and mortality trajectories.
In the “medium assumptions” scenario, in- and out-migration rates
are assumed to be constant at the levels observed over the past dec-
ades, but when the population base to which these constant rates are
applied diminishes over time, this has a compounding effect and also
results in declining absolute numbers of emigrants. This constant mi-
gration rate assumption is combined with relatively constant future
fertility at 1.6 children per woman in Serbia, and slowly improving
mortality conditions, similar to conditions in other European coun-
tries. Under this “medium assumptions” scenario the population of
Serbia reaches 5.35M by 2050, or 28% less than the population today
in 2020. This middle-of-the-road “medium assumptions” scenario
future falls between the “zero migration” scenario (resulting in a pro-
jected 5.87M in population by 2050) and the “double migration rates”
scenario (resulting in a projected 4.89M in population by 2050).
Populations Aging Ahead
In all cases modelled, the proportion of the population above age 65
in Serbia will be higher than today, growing from approximately 21%
in 2015 to 31% by 2050 in the “medium assumptions” scenario. These
ageing trends are largely set. In the purely theoretical case where (i)
fertility would immediately increase by 50 percent – which would
bring it closer to the current desired family size (Živković et al., 2017)
– and (ii) there would be no (zero) migration, the rate of population
ageing could be slowed by more than half. The increase in the average
age would only reach 24% of the population being above the age of
65 by 2050, mostly due to the change in birth rate (Lutz et al., 2019).
As described above, population ageing in Serbia is inevitable to some
degree regardless of the fertility or migration scenario, and is a prod-
uct not only of past low fertility and high out-migration, as reflect-
ed in the current age structure of the country, but also successes in
extending longevity. According to UN data, life expectancy at birth
(for both sexes together) in Serbia has increased from 66.7 years in
1956-70 to 75.8 years in 2015-20, thus increasing life expectancy in
the country by over 9 extra years of life in the last five decades (UN,
2019). But population ageing does not necessarily mean a growth in
dependency if social policies like retirement are flexible and incentiv-
ise labour force participation, even in older years. Serbia’s education-
al attainment, a proxy for the skills and adaptability of a population, is
expected to grow, with the proportion of people holding post-second-
ary training or university degrees rising from 21% in 2015 to nearly
33% by 2050 if trends continue.
Actually, this improvement in the educational attainment of the adult
population is a near certainty: in Serbia – like in almost every other
country – the younger cohorts are better educated than the older
ones. As those better educated cohorts move up the age pyramids
and the older, less-educated pass away (a process called demographic
metabolism) the average education of the population improves, even
if there would be some stagnation in the expansion of schooling and
a country’s education strategy. For example, if the COVID-19 crisis
would cause a serious interruption of the schooling system and that
would lead to lower learning outcomes over 1-2 years, this new trend
– if it cannot be compensated for while children are still of school age
– would only translate into a slower increase (rather than a stagnation
or a decrease) in human capital for the working age population, as it
would slow but not overcome or reverse the broader momentum of
educational attainment in Serbia.
A recent analysis in the trends of mean years of schooling (“MYS”)
and skills-adjusted mean years of schooling (“SAMYS”) of the work-
ing age population for all countries in the world 