 of the
same mindset, with many arguing in favor of early marriage, taxes for
celibacy, and rewards for marriage and parenthood (Goswami, 1985).
However, already in ancient Greece the philosopher Plato had spec-
ulated about an optimal population size, which implied that already
there was a concept that there could be too many people as well as
too few, depending on the circumstances. He suggested the ideal
population size for a Greek city state would be at a constant level of
5,040 households, mostly because the number is conveniently divis-
ible by many numbers (including 12, which had a sacred dimension
in ancient Greece), as well as this numerical limit helping people to
capably perform their roles as citizens by knowing the community
and avoiding anonymity.4 Debates on the relative merits of a small or
large population were also being held in ancient China as far back as
the 6th century B.C.E. (Xueyuan, 2019).
During most of the Middle Ages, when social phenomena were viewed
in fatalistic terms and population growth was valued as a byproduct of
nature, Henry IV of England made a famous statement connecting
the viability of the state to the well-being of those who live in the king-
dom and the sheer size of the population: “The strength and riches of
kings consist in the number and opulence of their subjects,” he sup-
posedly said around the year 1400 (Stangeland, 1904). Around the
same time the Arab philosopher and historian Ibn Khaldun in Tunis
wrote about the economic benefits of a growing population as it creat-
ed the conditions for increasing specialisation and division of labour,
which in turn would lead to higher incomes.5
The connection between population growth and economy was also
stressed by the Mercantilists in England, in particular John Graunt,
William Petty, and Edmund Halley as well as Johann Peter Süss-
milch in Prussia. These 17th century thinkers held the view that the
nations strongest in people and material goods would survive and
prevail over others. Quite specific policy recommendations flowed
from this outlook, such as penalties for non-marriage, or limiting
out-migration (except to their colonies). In 1662, John Graunt, who
is sometimes called the father of demography, published the “Bills
of Mortality” which are the first known statistical tables in demogra-
phy. He famously showed that for every 100 children born in London
only 16 were still alive at age 36, and only 3 at age 66 (Graunt, 1662).
This extremely high level of mortality, seen from today’s perspec-
tive, also showed that the biggest potential for enhancing population
growth was in the reduction of child mortality. This is what actually
happened in the beginning of the demographic transition in the 19th
century, but it was not considered as a viable option before modern
medicine and hygiene, and therefore the discussion at the time of
Graunt and the Mercantilists focused mostly on fertility.
Reproduction was also the main focus of Robert Malthus, who be-
lieved that human beings, like plants or animals, are “impelled” to
grow by a powerful “instinct” until they are held back by certain lim-
its. He saw the decisive limit to human population growth in the avail-
ability of food and what he called the means of subsistence. Malthus
famously argued that while the population grows geometrically (ex-
ponentially), the food supply could only grow linearly due to limited
availability of land and the diminishing returns to labour input. He
thus predicted repeated famines that would stop population growth
(positive checks) when growth would hit such limits. He did not over-
look the possibility of voluntary reductions in fertility (preventive
checks) through celibacy or abstinence within marriage, though he
considered this unrealistic because “the passion between the sexes
will never diminish” (Malthus, 1798).
This perspective on human nature and the inclinations for populations
to grow has survived as a powerful narrative up to this day and ha