arily slowed down emigration. Demand factors also
played the role – at that time, the EU was concerned with the impact
of Eastern Enlargement and hesitated even with the visa liberalisation
for Serbia. Still, emigration flows continued into the first decade of the
21st century and intensified with the post-2008-crisis recovery of the
EU, particularly between 2015 and 2019. The Covid-19 lockdowns in
2020 suspended emigration flows abruptly, although not completely,
and partly reversed the net emigration flows through the return (or
inability to leave Serbia) of many short-term or temporary migrants.
As a result of multiple waves and geographic dispersion of migration
from Serbia, members of the Serbian diaspora can be found all over the
world. Serbian diaspora in the broadest sense is made up of different
generations of migrants with different levels of ties with the kin-country.
According to the estimates of the United Nations, the total number of
Serbian emigrants in 2019 was around 950,00051, which accounts for
about 14% of the resident population in the country (excluding Koso-
vo52 and Metohija). In addition, one should bear in mind that, tech-
nically, in order for someone residing outside Serbia to be deemed a
Serbian emigrant, they must be born in Serbia. An alternative crite-
rion (in countries that do not keep statistics on residents by country
of birth) is that emigrants must have Serbian citizenship. Since many
Serbian-born citizens take the citizenship of the country they had em-
igrated to, the number of Serbian-born emigrants exceeds the num-
ber of Serbian citizens residing outside Serbia. We further discuss
this issue in the following section.
2.3  Measuring emigration from
Serbia – issues and purpose
In most domestic analyses, until recently, standard approach to pre-
senting data on emigration from Serbia was to use Population Census
as the main source or at least the starting point (e.g. Stanković 2014).
As already explained, the origin-country statistics on emigrant stock
are incomplete by definition and they always underestimate true ab-
solute number of emigrants. Moreover, such censuses distort relative
distribution of emigrants across destination countries. Administra-
tive annual outflow data (based on de-registration of residents) are
even less helpful, since they heavily underestimate the true number
of emigrants. The same is valid for return migration – if people do not
de-register as residents, there is no need to re-register.
On the other hand, immigration is subject to much stricter regula-
tions, with the process invariably involving residency visa application
and registration with authorities in the destination country. Thus, a
much better strategy is to look at the immigration statistics of desti-
50 https://www.migrationdataportal.org/themes/international-migrant-stocks
51 These estimates nominally include the emigrants from Kosovo and Metohija, since this province is treated as part of Serbia in the UN statistics. Most likely, the estimates
only partially cover the international migrants originating from the Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija, since all major destination countries treat Kosovo as a
separate entity in their migration statistics. In any case, the estimate of 14% of Serbian citizens or natives abroad should be taken as an upper bound of  ‘true’ share, since
the denominator used is for the resident population in the territory of Serbia without Kosovo and Metohija.
52 References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
101
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
nation countries and to look there for Serbian-born persons or Serbi-
an nationals53.
Applied to Serbia, throughout this chapter we define emigrant stock
flexibly as ‘the total number of Serbian migrants present outside of
Serbia at a particular point in time’. ‘Serbian migrants’ mi