and other written content can also con-
tribute to increasing the screening response rate (Clover et al., 1996;
Camilloni et al., 2013).
Interventions which can facilitate a screening test are: conducting
screening tests during regular examinations or consultations with a
specialist, or sending self-sampling tests by mail. Sending self-sam-
pling kits to people who have not responded to a screening call sig-
nificantly increases their participation in cervical cancer screening.
Also, sending a stool sample kit for an occult bleeding test could dras-
tically reduce the burden on screening services. Interventions aimed
at reducing logistical barriers, mobile mammograms, and the use of
pharmacies to provide occult bleeding test samples greatly facilitate
testing and may lead to a larger population undergoing screening
testing (Globocan, 2022).
The linking of data from cancer and screening registries and other
repositories of demographic data and causes of death is also crucial
for the application of European screening standards, and thus for re-
ducing the burden of disease on society (Anttila et al. 2015).
Pursuant to the Law on Health Insurance (2019), if the insured person
does not respond to the examination invitation or does not come in
for the screening examination, then such a person shall bear certain
consequences in terms of paying a higher price for treatment. Al-
though the coverage of the targeted population for all three screening
programmes is far from planned, the higher share of insured persons
in health care costs has not been described. Full implementation of
the law or certain benefits for those responding to the screening (such
as a day off from work) may have a greater impact on increasing the
screening response rate.
Due to the current demographic reality and a large proportion of old-
er persons in the population, a particular effort within health institu-
tions should be oriented towards the allocation of funds for nursing
care for older people within the department for home care and treat-
ment service, i.e., increasing the number of staff for home visits.
Another proposal is related to human resources allocation, with the
possibility of creating an environment where formal home care for
older persons should replace informal care delivered mostly by fam-
ily members. In this way, young people will be relieved and ready to
put their effort into family planning. Formal home care includes assis-
tance with personal care (such as dressing and bathing), homemaking
(e.g., laundry and cleaning), and clinical care (e.g., wound care).
It is a global trend (evident in nations including Germany, Japan, and
the U.S.) that the government reallocates more resources from resi-
dential to home care and community care, due to the benefits of ag-
ing in one’s place of residence and, more importantly, the low cost-ef-
ficiency of traditional modes of residential care (nursing homes).
Moreover, increased support for formal care at home can effectively
reduce the burden of informal caregivers (Murphy et al., 2017). For-
mal caregivers tend to have more professional experience providing
care for older adults. These caregivers include licensed professionals
such as social workers, registered nurses, medical doctors, occupa-
tional therapists, physiotherapists, and so forth. In addition, formal
care is also provided by unlicensed direct caregivers who had received
short-term training; these caregivers provide services to older people
in institutions such as nursing homes, assisted living facilities, com-
munity-based facilities, and private residences (Stone et al., 2010).
Whether the experience of using formal care is positive or negative
may be influenced by a number of factors, such as older adults’ pref-
erence to receive formal care at home instead of institutionalization,
and the quality and professionalism of the care providers.
Future planning should take into account external factors such as the
strong trend of a drain 