 children. Re-
sources which may be available to a couple are personal funds (or cred-
itworthiness), parental financial assistance, inherited real estate, or a
parental home (which allows more or less autonomy).
With regard to a couple’s financial, that is, material autonomy, there
are demands for independence from parents, sufficient income which
enables the achievement of the optimum (or minimum) functioning of
the family and the increasingly pronounced demands for financial au-
tonomy of women. The available resources include employment, rent,
social transfers and parental financial support. Institutional long-term
cash transfers are especially important, as they provide parents with a
significantly higher degree of material security compared to one-off
and short-term support measures.
The paper will analyse the aspects which we believe are crucial in es-
tablishing balance and which, meanwhile, influence the childbearing
decision. It is important to point out the significant limitation of this pa-
per, which is reflected in the dominant focus on the classic family form
— the nuclear heterosexual family. Although we are aware that the
family should not be spoken of in the singular, and that different types
of families — such as single-parent, combined (consisting of spouses
with children from previous marriages), with same-sex partners/par-
ents have certain different needs, due to the inability to cover all family
forms, here we will try to find answers to some questions related to the
dominant form. But we believe that these issues should be opened and
work on practical solutions should begin as soon as possible.
Employment and job stability in the labour market is an important
factor in making a decision on childbearing, but also achieving a de-
sirable lifestyle for the whole family. This factor is proving to be very
important among men, but even more so among women. In Europe,
women with stable employment are considerably more likely to have
a second child than unemployed and inactive women (Greulich et al.,
2016). In Central and Eastern European countries, women who are
employed, have secure jobs and have enough income to provide an
optimum livelihood are more likely to start a family and have more
children (Matysiak, Vignoli, 2008).This effect is more pronounced in
those countries in which there is good support for parenting, particu-
larly the availability of  kindergartens, which is usually a condition for
women to work at all, and then also to establish work-family balance.
In addition to (secure) employment, among women, a significant factor
in family planning is the man’s income stability and level. In  Germany,
it was noticed that among men there is a direct connection between
the amount of income and the intention to have the first child, so that
with higher incomes there is a higher readiness for the first child. There
is also an indirect link between job satisfaction and intention to have a
child, as job satisfaction implies less conflict in relationships, and thus a
greater willingness for men to become parents (Berninger et al., 2012).
The situation in Serbia is not much different. Young people state that
employment and income certainty, along with an independent hous-
ing unit, are key factors in deciding to start a family and have children
(Tomanović, 2012) and these expectations are more prominent with
2  Position at the Labour Market
78
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
the increase in the young people’s level of education (Tomanović,
et al., 2016). The transition to adulthood in Serbia usually follows a
standardised path, i.e. it implies a clear sequence of life events. For
young men, that means finishing school, getting a job, getting married
and having children. Independent housing, although it is something
that is expected and desired, largely depends on resources, so those
who have less resources will start thei