ns (EIM, 2017). In Serbia, the practice of ART is
presented as a contribution to the birth rate despite the data which
shows that the share of births resulting from successful in vitro fertili-
zation is negligible in the total birth rate, i.e. around 1.5%
of babies in relation to the total average number of births in Serbia
(about 65,000), which is a low share of participation relative to Slo-
venia (6%), Denmark (6.2%) or Finland (5.8%) (Kupka et al., 2016;
Kričković, 2018).
2  Infertility
103 World Health Organization. Infertility is a global public health issue. Available at:
https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/topics/infertility/perspective/en/ (accessed September 15, 2021)
104 The region of Vojvodina records a significant increase in the provision of ART services, especially in private health care institutions (IPH, 2018). The reasons underlying
these regional disparities of ART service should be a subject of future research.
145
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Lifestyle factors refer to the behaviour and ways of life that could in-
fluence the general health and wellbeing of individuals including fer-
tility. While many aspects of life are not modifiable, lifestyles may be
changed. As fertility can be influenced by a variety of factors, one pos-
sible explanation for the declining fertility trend would be that there
are different lifestyle practices that contribute to the deterioration of
male and female fertility. Research shows that lifestyle factors such
as nutrition, weight, exercise, sleeping, physical and psychological
stress, risk behaviours e.g. smoking, alcohol consumption, substance
and drug use and abuse, etc. have profound effects on health and dis-
ease. Fertility is no exception. They play a key role in determining re-
productive health and can positively or negatively influence fertility in
women, in men, or in both (Acharya et al., 2017; Sharma et al., 2013).
While lifestyle influences the possibility of conception, lifestyle is
significantly influenced by socio-economic determinants. Poverty is
one of the key factors in explaining differences in lifestyles and health
outcomes. These differences are also impacted by differences in the
position held in society by an individual or population group (which is
also reflected in access to resources such as education, employment,
housing), and the level of participation in society and control over
one’s own life. Higher incomes and higher social status are associat-
ed with healthier choices and better health outcomes. The greater the
difference between the richest and the poorest people, the greater the
difference in health. Also, a low level of education increases the like-
lihood that a person will choose an unhealthy lifestyle, which leads to
poorer health outcomes. Better access to health services affects dis-
ease prevention and faster treatment. These socio-economic deter-
minants strongly interact and influence lifestyle choices and health in
general. Improvement in one of them can produce an improvement
in health behaviour or in health outcomes among individuals but also
in entire populations (WHO, 2003; WHO, 2008).
According to our information, there is no adequate data on the man-
ner and extent to which health topics are covered by school curricula.
It is known that there are no individual subjects that deal with public
health issues, but that such teaching units are sporadically processed
within other subjects such as biology or physical education. On the
other hand, right after the home, children spend most of their time in
school, which is why the school is identified as an institution where it
is necessary to intervene in order to raise the awareness of children
and employees about the importance of a healthy lifestyles and to
stimulate them to take action. i.e. change.
Nutrition from the earliest period of life has a significant impact on
health, reproduc