ties. There
is no clear evidence of cross-national convergence in such policies.
Different mixes of these three policy instruments are rooted in wel-
fare state histories as well as different attitudes towards families and
the role that governments should play in influencing such personal
decisions.
In terms of the scientific literature studying the effectiveness of
pro-natal policies, there have been several attempts to summarise the
experiences and the effects of such policies on the level of fertility in
different countries. Among the mixed cases, not all of the implement-
ed policies have achieved the intended changes in the conditions
under which young women and men decide to start their families or
extend them, and not all changes in these conditions actually result-
ed in changes in observed fertility rates. Gauthier concluded from a
comprehensive survey of many such policies and their effects that the
evidence of family policies on fertility trends is inconclusive (Gauth-
ier, 2007).
Luci-Greulich and Thevenon studied the experience of 18 OECD
member countries over the period from 1980 to 2007. Due to the
fact that the early 2000s were a period of increasing TFRs (total fer-
tility rates) in many rich countries, this study aimed at assessing the
role of different policies in what they called the “recent fertility re-
bound” (Luci-Greulich and Thevenon, 2013). Their results show that
all instruments of family policy (paid leave, childcare services, and
financial transfers) had positive influences on fertility. Comparing
the different interventions, they found that both in-cash benefits dur-
ing childhood and childcare services had bigger impacts than leave
entitlements or benefits granted around childbirth. Findings on the
most effective pro-natal policies suggest that parents  have a longer
time horizon in mind and calculate the anticipated stability and per-
sistence of such policies when making fertility decisions. . Changing
such policies every election cycle or otherwise not guaranteeing their
durability undermines the confidence of would-be parents in such
support mechanisms.
Another very recent comparative study also takes the latest TFR de-
clines in several industrialised countries into account (Stone, 2020).
With a specific view towards the U.S., it asks what the U.S. can learn
from the experience of other countries, mostly those in Europe. It
compares the experiences of Poland and Hungary as prominent ex-
amples of large-scale public efforts to boost the birth rate. Studying
short-term trends in CBR (the crude birth rate) it shows that in Poland,
the birth rate increased rather quickly after the policy initiatives by
some 10% before falling to a level that was still 6% higher than prior
to such policies. In Hungary, on the other hand, different but equally
ambitious efforts have resulted in a 2% short-term increase followed
by a decrease, falling to below the initial CBR levels before such poli-
cies were put in place. One problem the author speculates in the study
is that the Hungarian system is designed to heavily encourage larger
families, in particular for couples to have a 3rd child (or more). Still, at
only a couple of years old, it is too early to judge the long-term success
of these ambitious initiatives and the results may change.
In the study described above, Stone also provides a meta-analysis of
34 academic studies since 2000 assessing the effectiveness of specif-
ic pro-natal policies, 22 of which contain sufficiently detailed analyses
of the policies’ effects to be used to estimate how fertility can be influ-
enced by various pro-natal incentives (Stone, 2020). The results show
that an increase in the present value of child benefits, equal to 10% of
a household’s income, can be expected to produce between 0.5% and
4.1% higher birth rates. In summary, the study finds that more finan-
cial support does yield more children, but it takes substantial fund-
ing. Or, in other words, trying to boost fer