-
tifying qualification needs, and are a cooperation platform for em-
ployers and education. The priority in building institutional capaci-
ty should be to raise the competencies of SSC members, which has
already begun to unfold through certain trainings that included two
main areas: profiles and qualifications. We are advocating that more
time should also be devoted to different methodologies for skills fore-
casting, especially those taking into account demographic changes as
a variable. Focusing only on secondary education, as mentioned in
previous Chapters, Serbia spends the least portion of the budget on
secondary education. The mostly theoretical nature of Serbia’s VET
programmes can help explain the low per-student spending, where-
as these programmes tend to be more costly across OECD countries,
because of the need to adapt infrastructure and materials for practi-
cal learning (ETF, 2020). In order for VET programmes in Serbia to
become more relevant, changes in financing need to ensure sufficient
funds for improving practical teaching, investing in new technol-
ogies, and raising teacher capacities in VET (especially of practical
subjects). Moreover, postsecondary and short-cycle courses at higher
skills levels are in demand by employers and individuals, but these
offers are insufficiently developed in the Serbian VET system. Ex-
panding the VET system with postsecondary and short-cycle courses
should be a priority, especially having in mind the grave needs of the
economy in the context of depopulation.
C H A P T E R 6
Željka Stamenković
Depopulation and Public Health
142
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
Depopulation is a social phenomenon relating to a reduction in the
population of a country, with drivers behind it being simple, com-
prising low fertility rates, external and internal migrations and high
mortality rates.
From the public health perspective, the increase in fertility rates and
high mortality rates are intercorrelated and joint  measures are nec-
essary to overcome the current situation. All three driving forces of
depopulation (fertility, migration, and mortality) result from human
decisions - when to have children and how many, where to live, and a
series of decisions over a life course affecting how long we live - and
reflect the full complexity of human decision-making. This includes a
web of interlinked personal resources (such as knowledge and skills,
personal ties, socioeconomic status, etc.) and the spatial and social
structures influencing access to opportunities (including culture, in-
frastructure, governance, or the environment).
One of the main causes leading to a low fertility rate is infertility99
as a global problem that happens in one out of five couples. Lifestyle
factors, the rise in obesity and environmental factors in relation to ur-
banization are also affecting fertility and leading to a rise in male and
female subfertility100 .
Couples and women are postponing childbirth and this has led to
a true drop in their fertility level due to ovarian ageing and related
reasons leading to reduced outlooks for conception. Postponement
of childbirth is becoming one of the key determinants of negative
trends in fertility and overall demographic development. There are
various causes behind the postponement. One of them is extended
education. More and more women are focused on acquiring higher
levels of education. Consequently, the time of childbirth is postponed
until the woman completes her education. Based on recent research,
a direct relationship has been established between the increase in the
age at which women give birth to their first child, which is a ubiqui-
tous trend in many European countries, and a higher level of educa-
tion of women and the higher portion of their participation in paid
jobs (Veljović, 2017).
General instability in social, intimate and business relationships is
also strongly re