 a primarily expressive role. In Serbia, this norm is more
accepted in rural than in urban settings and more often among the less educated compared to those with higher education.
30 Research conducted on the female student population shows that the desired number of children (2.56) is also considerably higher than the one achieved (Vasić, 2012).
76
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
child on their own. It is likely that with the further emancipation and
maturation of new generations of women in rural areas, this pressure
will ease, which will lead to the convergence of patterns of deciding
about childbearing between rural and the urban areas.
The population of Serbia, like most European ones, is characterised
by delayed births. Postponing parenthood brings with it two very
likely scenarios — giving up childbirth (due to the inability to find an
adequate partner or health risks) or having one child (Penev, Stank-
ović, 2021). Both scenarios are more likely to increase the educational
level of women, as education delays other life transitions and brings
higher demands in terms of expectations from one’s own life, parent-
hood, and what will be provided to the child (Rašević, 2015; Penev,
Stanković, 2021; Penev, Stanković 2019). However, in the domestic
context, demographers note one significant phenomenon where fer-
tility rates (in the 2002-2015 period) of women with higher education
became higher than of women with secondary education and were
approaching women with primary education: This trend correspond
to those in the economically developed countries, and they are attrib-
uted to a better position on the labour market, greater economic inde-
pendence and the ability of highly educated women to balance work
and parental responsibilities than those with secondary education
(Rašević, Vasić, 2017; Nikitović et al., 2018).31
Roditeljska tranzicija – zahtevi i resursi
Work
Family
Housing
Finance
Parental transition – requirements and resources
Employment
Caring for children
Independent household
Financial independence of
couples
Overtime
Domestic work
Independent unit within the
parental household
Women’s independence
Job (in)security
Spousal requests
Sufficient funds for basic needs
Non-standard work schedule
Sufficient funds for leisure
activities
Resources in a particular domain
Flexible schedule and working
hours
Spousal support
Inherited property
Income from work
Parental leave
Relative support
Large enough parents’ unit
Social transfers
Enough time after work
Gender equality values
Enough resources for buying
their own apartment
Rent
Work culture sensitised for
family responsibilities
Preschool institutions
State subsidies for buying or
renting real estate
Parental or kinship care
Table 1. Balancing work and parenting – domains, requirements and resources              * topics which will be specifically addressed in this paper are bolded
Source: Voydanoff (2005); Stanojević et al. (2020)
1.2	 Work-family balance
The work-family balance is a useful analytical framework which con-
nects different aspects of family and professional life and indicates in
a comprehensive way the degree of harmonisation of different spheres
of life. When planning and entering the family setting, couples and in-
dividuals face different requirements (normative expectations in dif-
ferent spheres), and the resources (individual, family and institution-
al) available to them will determine the 1. decision on having the first
child, 2. decision on having the second and each subsequent child, and
3. quality of life. We will look at requirements and resources in the two
key areas of life — work and family — to which we have added housing
and finance (Voydanoff, 2005; Stanojević, et al., 2020).
The labour market should provide parents with optimal earnings, op-
timal time dedicated to work, and enough time for family responsibil-
ities. This optimum can be achieved th