 point indexation
In Serbia, pensions are currently indexed to wages and prices accord-
ing to the ‘Swiss formula’.133 Most EU countries also apply some com-
bination of these two parameters in pension indexation, with greater
weight assigned to prices (European Commission, 2018). In contribu-
tion-based pension schemes, indexation to wages is an exception, and
even when applied, it is linked to sustainability factors (Hohnerlein,
2019: 253).  A number of countries opt for indexation to prices only,
with an additional increase if GDP growth exceeds a certain level
(Hungary, Portugal). In the constant search for a balance between sus-
tainability and adequacy, frequent changes in indexation parameters,
both in Serbia and in Europe, are the rule rather than the exception.134
A distinctive feature of Serbia’s system is equal modalities of
pre-retirement earnings valorisation135 i.e. indexation of gener-
2  Pensions
131 Budget subsidies are often present, and in some countries tripartite funding is mandated by law. The data on contribution levels in EU countries are available in the
European Commission’s Ageing Reports (European Commission, 2018:51,61).
132 Net replacement rate - benefit in the first year of retirement divided by pre-retirement income for a single person with a 40-year career with constant average earnings
(base case). ‘The aggregate replacement ratio is gross median individual pension income of the population aged 65–74 relative to gross median individual earnings from
work of the population aged 50–59, excluding other social benefits’ (Eurostat, 2011).
133 ‘Indexation refers to the policy for the up-rating of pensions in payment from the point of claim of the pension benefit onwards.’ (OECD, 2005: 34). According to this
formula, wages and prices carry equal weights – 50:50. Serbia’s pension indexation modality was modified frequently in the past 20 years (Matković & Stanić, 2020).
134 For details on the changes in the pension indexation in Serbia, see Matković and Stanić, 2020.
135 ‘Valorisation: the adjustment of past earnings to account for changes in living standards between the time when pension rights are earned and when they are claimed.’
(OECD, 2005:17)
169
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
al point and pension indexation, found in only few EU countries
(Germany, Croatia and Romania until 2030, among those with
point systems). In general, in most countries, valorisation is pre-
dominantly or solely tied to wage growth, while pension indexation
is predominantly tied to prices (European Commission, 2018). In
addition, Germany includes a sustainability factor, whereby point
value uprating is also dependent on the ratio of pensioners to con-
tributors (Boulhol, 2019).
The decision not to introduce separate indexation parameters, tak-
en in Serbia in 2003, resulted from the finding that, under the condi-
tions of rapid wage growth, the indexation of the general point value
to wages, and of pensions to prices would lead to wide disparities in
pension levels for pensioners with equal work histories.136
The decrease of the net replacement rate in Serbia and the more reg-
ularised economy than it was the case in the initial years of transition
point to the need to review this arrangement. In case of a separation
whereby the valorisation formula would assign a higher weight to
wages, while the pension indexation formula would assign a higher
weight to prices, “new” pensioners would have higher replacement
rates. Essentially, their living standard deterioration immediately
upon retirement would thus be less pronounced, while later on, ben-
efit amounts would grow more slowly, but would allow sustaining the
real pension value and the standard enjoyed during their working life.
It should, however, be noted that, in the recent past, Serbia’s average
wage growth was still high in some years (the real wage index stood
at 8.4 and 7.8% in