average in Europe (OECD, 2016) and migra-
tion often involves an element of being pushed, out of economic ne-
cessity.  Contemporary population change, to the extent it is driven by
persistent transfers of people from one region to another, is perhaps
the most consequential, long-term aspect of international relations.
As the dynamic between countries is less rivalrous today in Europe
than in the past, the conversation around migration is turning to one
of examining imbalances and finding solidarity with the sending re-
gions affected by population decline due to migration.
Both the economic system and popular sentiment generally expect
population growth to continue to occur, as it is a fixture in the psyche
of modern society. This fixture has been influenced by the human
experience especially over the last four decades of the 20th centu-
ry during which, indeed, the vast majority of countries in the world
experienced rapid population growth. While a reckoning with the
end of this larger 300-year-long trend is coming this century, West-
ern Europe has at least temporarily avoided confronting this change
through in-migration from its neighbours as well as from other con-
tinents. This leaves other regions, such as the Balkans, as covered in
this report, to be among the first group of countries (together with
others in East Asia) to deal with modern “voluntary” depopulation.
Simply taking a country’s current population size as the norm is rath-
er arbitrary, and unending population growth is, by definition, un-
sustainable. So, at some point, the slowing or ending of population
growth is natural and to be expected (Lutz, Sanderson, and Scherbov,
2001). Still, there are multiple challenges associated with population
decline, within certain bounds, given the causes behind it.
In this report we will address this issue from a multi-dimensional
demographic perspective, which means that we will not only look at
population size and age structure, but also differentiate by level of
education and labour force participation. We expect smaller but high-
er-skilled societies across Europe, and as human resources grow more
specialised and valuable there will be even more consequential com-
petition for workers. If Western European countries that target the Bal-
kans for migration do not pay greater attention to the impacts on the
countries of origin, instead of being primarily driven by their own do-
mestic labour market shortages, they risk undermining the long-term
economic and social development of the Balkan region.  In the follow-
ing sections, the importance of human capital in the context of popu-
lation decline and associated greater rates of ageing will be discussed.
2  The Final Phase of the Demographic Transition
Demographic transition is the progression of demographic regimes,
from the high birth and death rates of the pre-industrial era, to a mid-
dle-stage when death rates decline and spark rapid population growth
until, finally, birth rates correspondingly decline and population
growth moderates or ends. This transition, which was also previously
labelled as the “demographic revolution,” has been characterised as
the transition from uncontrolled high levels of birth and death rates
to a modern system of controlled and low levels of these rates (in the
context of fertility, “controlled” refers essentially to the reproductive
behaviour of individuals/couples, while in the context of mortality it
also has a strong public health component). Intermediate stages of
the demographic transition – when death rates have already fallen
while birth rates remain high – are associated with rapid natural pop-
ulation growth, where “natural” refers to the balance of births and
deaths not considering out-migration, which in open populations is a
third factor impacting population change.
While in the process of demographic transition, declines in mortality
are almost always an object of universal aspiration but high fertili-
ty norms are often d