y far the most important source of remittances.
However, our analysis only starts with statistical exercise. By using
some simple concepts, instruments and various eclectic and some-
times innovative sources, we try to answer substantial questions on the
nature of Serbian emigration and whether it has substantially changed
in recent period. The two main direct diagnostic questions arising from
the data and descriptive quantitative analysis are the following:
1.	 Are most Serbian emigrants permanent (settlement) or temporary
(short-term or circular) migrants?
2.	Are leavers significantly better educated than stayers? In other
words, is there (technically defined) brain drain from Serbia and
how severe is it?
These questions are dealt with in Sections 3 and 4, respectively. In
Section 5, the imbalances of Serbian labour market are discussed as
push factors for emigration. In Section 6 we conclude and provide
some cautious recommendations.
100
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
In contrast to estimates of migration stocks data50, estimates on migra-
tion inflows and outflows by country of destination or origin are not
available at the global level.  Countries may calculate migration flows
based on information from administrative sources, such as data de-
rived from issuance of temporary or permanent residence permits and
population registries, or they may use sample survey data. OECD and
Eurostat data on migration inflows allow to distinguish between dif-
ferent types of migration flows including work, family reunion, educa-
tion, humanitarian migration (refugees, asylum seekers and the like)
and other (such as retirees).
2.2  Evolution of emigration from
Serbia
Serbia has traditionally been an emigration country. After the World
War II, it has gone through several waves of intensified emigration.
The first significant wave of emigration mainly for economic reasons
started in the 1960s, with intensive emigration of mostly unskilled
temporary workers to Western Germany regulated by a bilateral
agreement, soon to be followed by significant but still somewhat less
intensive emigration to other Western European countries. This ear-
ly wave of emigration also remains very relevant for the present mi-
gration outcome, through two main mechanisms. The first one is the
establishment of long standing diaspora networks that tend to cluster
the members of Serbian diaspora around certain centers in destina-
tion countries. The diaspora networks are potentially self-sustainable
dynamic mechanisms which over a certain period facilitate perma-
nent or temporary migration.
The second mechanism is in a way the mirror image of the first one.
Some regions in Serbia traditionally maintained high levels of emi-
gration following the early ‘guest worker’ wave, in particular Eastern
Serbia. At some later point, Eastern Serbia was joined by another
relatively poor region in South-Western Serbia - Sandžak (Penev and
Predojević-Despić, 2012) To this day, this early wave of emigration
has a considerable impact on the flows of returnees - pensioners, and
on the stability of part of remittances (more precisely, personal trans-
fers) stemming from pensions in foreign currency.
The political and economic factors of disintegration of the former Yu-
goslavia, trigerred the next large wave of emigration. This emigration
wave included a shift toward long-distance overseas destinations,
primarily Anglo-Saxon countries, from Canada to Australia and New
Zealand, whose immigration rules favoured admission of highly ed-
ucated immigrants. On the other hand, Serbia’s overall migration
balance remained relatively stable during the 1990s due to an equal-
ly intensive inflow of ethnic Serb population from other parts of the
former Yugoslavia.
Political changes in the early 2000s brought about a promise of the
country’s economic and political integration into the European Un-
ion and tempor