nsultative and hospital,
where more complex health services are provided. When the health
problem exceeds the hospital capacity, patients are referred to the
tertiary level of health care (Law on Health Care, 2019).
Services provided in the private sector are paid for out of pocket or through
additional private health insurance (Law on Health Insurance, 2019).
The state or autonomous province provides the funds for the con-
struction and equipment of state health institutions, which includes:
capital investments, investments for maintenance of premises, pro-
curement of medical and other equipment necessary for the opera-
tion of the health institutions and transportation means, procure-
ment of equipment for the development of an integrated health
information system, as well as for other obligations determined by
law and the founding act.
At the national level, the Ministry of Health develops a plan for the
number of health workers in health institutions based on the Decree
on the Plan of the Health Institutions’ Network (2020), which includes
employees covered by individual health plans of health institutions.
The public sector is the main employer of health workers in Serbia.
Funds for the functioning of the health system are provided through
contributions for compulsory health insurance, general taxation, out-
of-pocket payments, voluntary health insurance premiums, and in-
ternational donation-based financing initiatives. The main source of
income for financing health care in Serbia are contributions for com-
pulsory health insurance that come from the salaries of employees
and the profit of the employer. The Law on Contributions for Compul-
sory Social Insurance (Official Gazette, 2022) defines the contribution
rate including the rate for compulsory pension and disability insur-
ance (26%), for compulsory health insurance (10.3%) and for unem-
ployment insurance (0.75%). Contributions for compulsory pension
and disability insurance and unemployment insurance also go partly
into the RHIF, through contributions from the Republic Pension and
Disability Insurance Fund and the National Employment Service. In
relative terms, as a percentage of its gross domestic product (GDP),
Serbia spends a significant part of its funds on health care.
The Republic of Serbia allocates a higher percentage of gross domes-
tic product (GDP) for health care compared to a number of European
countries. However, in terms of absolute amount, Serbia allocates
small funds for health care compared to other European countries,
which is a consequence of the relatively low level of gross domestic
product. According to available data, in 2018 in Serbia, total health
expenditures accounted for 8.5% of GDP, more precisely 1484 USD
per capita (according to purchasing power parity) (Krstic et al., 2019).
Total health care expenditures grew over a ten-year period, showing
a steady decline in their share of the gross domestic product (WHO,
2021). Public sources of financing in the health system have been con-
stantly declining over the last decade, reaching 59.4% of total health
expenditures in 2018. Consequently, private expenditures are a sig-
nificant source of funding, accounting for 39.6% of total health care
expenditures in 2018 (WHO, 2021). Out of pocket payments (OOP),
in the form of co-payments and direct payments, account for the
vast majority of this private spending (around 96%), while voluntary
health insurance accounts for less than 1% of total health spending.
Compulsory health insurance contributions from the National Health
Insurance Fund, RHIF, represent the largest share in total health rev-
enues from public sources (94%) (IPH, 2018). Currently, the system
of financing social health insurance is very burdened and most of the
burden of financing is placed on employees in the public sector.
1  Health System of the Republic of Serbia
144
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demograp