r own family within the family
of origin. The transition of young women generally follows the same
path, but for those with the lowest education, it means first a fami-
ly transition and only then possibly a work transition. Almost half of
young women (46%) first have a child, and only then get a secure job,
while considerably fewer men (29%) follow that path. In both cases,
parental transition more often precedes secure employment for those
who do not have university education (Tomanović, Stanojević, 2015).
Thus, the preferred model of parental transition includes fulfilled
preconditions — employment, sufficient income, and possibly an
independent housing unit and occurs less frequently in women than
men and in the less educated compared to the highly educated.
2.1  Labour market in Serbia
Having in mind the effects that the labour market has on achieving
the work-family balance, in this chapter we will try to answer the fol-
lowing questions using the available data: To what extent are men
32 We choose this age group, considering that the statistics shows that the largest number of women (over 95%) complete the fertile cycle in that period.
33 As many as 30% of women consider themselves unemployed, while 5% do not work due to family and parental obligations, and the rest are inactive due to education and
other reasons (EU-SILC 2018).
and women present in the labour market? How secure are the jobs
they do? Which people quit work because of family obligations? How
sensitive is the work culture to parental responsibilities? Using the
2019 Labour Force Survey data we will reveal the labour market po-
sition of men and women aged 15-45 through the following dimen-
sions: a) employment, b) job security, c) guaranteed labour rights.32
2.1.1	 Employment
Men aged 15 to 29 have higher employment rates, significantly low-
er inactivity rates due to shorter time spent in the education process
and slightly lower unemployment rates compared to women (Chart
2). The relation between the sexes in middle-aged people (30 to 45
years) indicates similar unemployment rates, but significantly high-
er employment rates for men and higher inactivity rates for women.
Less activity in the labour market, with more frequent unemploy-
ment in women, indicates a gender gap and persistence of gender
spheres divisions, so that work is more often perceived as the primary
responsibility of men, and domestic duties and child care as the pri-
mary responsibility of women.
Data on the self-perception of one’s own work status by women of the
same age demonstrate a different picture, because there are fewer
women who consider themselves to be employed (47%),33 while the
situation is only slightly better among women with children (58% re-
Chart 2. Position on the labour market of women and men aged 15-45
Source: LFS, 2019, author’s calculations
Employment rate
Unemployment rate
Inactivity rate
Employment rate
Unemployment rate
Inactivity rate
Employment rate
Unemployment rate
Inactivity rate
Employment rate
Unemployment rate
Inactivity rate
Men
43
20
46
32
23
59
83
9
9
72
10
19
Women
Men
Women
15 – 29
30 – 45
79
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
34 Among young mothers, aged 15 to 35, there are twice as many inactive women as non-mothers (29% vs. 17%) (Stanojević, 2018). One third of them (34%) report that they
are unemployed, 8% state that they do not work due to family obligations, and the rest are inactive for other reasons. Analyses also show that mothers have a slightly
lower level of job satisfaction compared to women who have not given birth, as well as that they are less satisfied with their free time.
port being employed).34 Comparing the personal perception with the
statistical way of defining employment shows us that although more
women have the opportunity to work and earn, it does not mean that
their status in the market is unambiguous, and that in addition to (oc-
cas