ts living in rural areas and older
people. The older population has acquired the habit of going to the
doctor’s office, and thereby a face-to-face conversation. This cultural
habit, as well as the age of the patients, are factors that can signifi-
cantly impact the lower use of the possibilities of telemedicine.
160
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
a healthy lifestyle (primarily on risk factors), from a very early stage
of life in educational institutions, will later reflect in a healthy start
in life and more control over one’s own health. In the end, this will
significantly improve population health. Within current educational
curricula, more focus should be placed on health, public health, and
the significance of a healthy lifestyle. Physical education is an integral
part of the curriculum but it should be promoted more, insisting on
increasing physical activity among boys and especially among girls.
Promoting a higher level of physical activity in schools may contrib-
ute to a wide range of health benefits, including reduced risk of many
chronic NCDs, improvement of mental health and quality of life.
Physical activity also has an indirect effect on health if it promotes
academic achievement, which further contributes to a higher socio-
economic status of an adult.
Besides learning, it is important to translate knowledge into practice
so, concerning this, healthy meals could be served in schools, where
possible. When fast food is less available to children, they will turn to
what is available to them and thus eat healthier. The development of
healthy habits, in this case, related to diet, will significantly contrib-
ute to the higher level of awareness and, consequently, their better
health outcomes both now (e.g. prevent obesity) and later in life.
It is especially important to mention the activities and efforts to learn
more about ones sexual and reproductive health in order to achieve
full fertility potential in the future. Interactive workshops within the
curriculum and not as voluntary activities, where pupils and students
can learn more on the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases,
unwanted pregnancies and different types and proper use of modern
methods of contraception must be imperative. These activities will
result in more usage of modern contraceptives, while the level of un-
wanted pregnancies, abortions and health consequences will decline
and protect the fertility potential of younger generations.
So far, sexual and reproductive health have been covered in the cur-
riculum in biology and in some voluntary workshops. In order to en-
courage young people to use modern methods of contraception and
thus prevent unwanted events such as unwanted pregnancies and
sexually transmitted diseases, that can later lead to other complica-
tions (AIDS as the consequence of HIV infection or cervical cancer
as a consequence of Human Papillomavirus infection), it is necessary
to focus efforts on raising young people’s awareness of the impor-
tance of these methods and their use. Through family conversation,
through formal and informal (peer) education in schools (primary
and secondary), it is necessary to remove the taboo from the topic
of sexual and reproductive health and to change the cultural pattern
where there is a negative attitude towards condoms.
During childhood, there are some time points when children have
mandatory check-ups. They include examinations done by different
specialists (paediatricians, ophthalmologists, physiatrists, dentists).
These preventive examinations may indicate changes that are detect-
ed at an early stage and can be corrected and treated in time. When it
comes to adults, not a huge number of them are aware of the impor-
tance of preventive check-ups. Although some institutions and com-
panies provide preventive check-ups for their employees, a majority
of employers in the Republic of Serbia do not. Ther