se in the southern half, with exceptions in both cases.
Cities where industry is based on raw materials from the immediate
vicinity, and especially those with a strong food industry, had better
results. By contrast, cities with heavy and machine industries fared
worse. For example, Pančevo and Sremska Mitrovica, with a relatively
small share of light industry for Vojvodina, proved to be the worst at the
provincial level. However, the worst results were in Bor and Zaječar in
Eastern Serbia, which have a significant decline in population.
Figure 4. Concentration of higher education institutions in the re-
searched cities according to their demographic trends
0
25
50
75
100 km
Scale
Legend
Rivers
Bigger cities
Smaller cities
Hungary
Romania
Bulgaria
North Macedonia
Montenegro
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
<90%
90-95%
95-100%
100-105%
105-110%
>110%
<60,000
50-60,000
40-50,000
30-40,000
20-30,000
<20,000
Subotica
Sombor
Kikinda
Novi Sad
Zrenjanin
Vršac
Pančevo
Beograd
Šabac
Loznica
Valjevo
Smederevo
Požarevac
Bor
Zaječar
Jagodina
Kragujevac
Čačak
Užice
Novi Pazar
Kraljevo
Kruševac
Prokuplje
Leskovac
Pirot
Vranje
Niš
Srem. Mitrovica
SRBIJA
Demographic trends, 2002-2011
Number of higher education institutions by city population
187 Annex - Table 6.
189
C H A P T E R 8
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
4.5  Higher-order urban functions
and relation to urban depopulation
The concept of higher-order city urban functions is considered to in-
clude all those central functions which have significance above the
local (city, municipal) level. Examples of this are: faculties, colleg-
es, research institutes and centres, cultural institutions of regional
and national importance, but also creative industry centres or large
shopping centres. A type of these functions which, according to the
shrinking city theories, offers the biggest opportunities for the city’s
renewal – higher and college education – was selected for this anal-
ysis. The importance of decentralisation of this sector has already
been emphasised. It is often emphasised that successful small cities
in Europe are precisely those ones that have been affected by ‘stu-
dentification’ (UO, 2020). Attracting students as a future higher ed-
ucation population is important because it has a long-term impact
on the city in further attracting capital in the broadest sense (human,
economic, creative, cultural). In the analysis of small and successful
US shrinking cities, it was noted that they were all characterised by
an above-average level of educated population in relation to other
shrinking cities (Florida, 2019).
As an indicator of higher-order urban functions, the number of
higher and college education institutions (universities, colleges,
academies) with nationally accredited curricula was used in rela-
tion to the number of city’s inhabitants. In the case of universities
which are not divided into faculties, the number of divisions or
departments with accredited curricula is counted.188 The depart-
ments and university representative offices that are branches are
not included in the analysis. It turned out that they usually serve to
attract potential students in the city in which they are situated, that
educational activities almost always take place at the headquarters
of a given institution, and that the state often insists on this (Blic,
2018).
Comparative overview of cities according to this criterion indicates
that Novi Pazar is in by far the best position with two universities
and a total of 10 departments with accredited curricula.189 This is
in line with demographic trends, as Novi Pazar had the highest
population growth during the 2002-2011 period (Fig. 4). Subotica,
Leskovac and Vranje are also further away from larger cities and
have a higher concentration of higher education institutions. It is
obvious that due to the distance from larger cities, they can hardly
rely on the capacities of their higher 