gainst its neighbours and
Western European economies.
Besides the economic drivers, a common theme throughout Eastern
Europe is the equivocation between going abroad and success. Ser-
bia is no exception in this regard. “Staying here is what young people
would call ‘a loser’s move’,” said one Serbian social psychologist in
a media report on the topic, a trend confirmed by a broad media re-
view in which the author summarised popular thinking as, “get out
of Serbia for a better life” (Simić, 2018; Brezjanović-Shogren, 2019).
These blunt characterisations sum up an uninspired narrative of the
future that has persisted in Serbian culture, and is accompanied by
parental support for young peoples’ decision to leave 90% of the
time (Government of Serbia, 2018). Both migration and fertility de-
cisions involve a calculation about the future and rely on a general
optimism that is lacking not only in Serbia, but in many European
societies today.
While Serbian emigrants can give concrete examples of migration
push- and pull-factors at work, returnees offer insights into what
attracts people to build lives at home in Serbia. Returnees, a self-se-
lected group who have often achieved some financial success, cite
as motivations to come back a feeling of belonging, family ties,
day-to-day comforts, and even prospects of giving their children a
better childhood in Serbia than where they had lived abroad (Brez-
janović-Shogren, 2019). Interestingly, the perception of quality of life
was found to change with experience in Western Europe and North
America, as Serbian returnees seemingly changed from placing high-
est value on better pay and material success that compelled them to
leave, to instead stressing intangible cultural factors that drew them
to return home. This finding seems to support the idea that once ba-
sic economic security is met, many people would naturally prefer to
pursue options other than out-migration if not otherwise feeling com-
pelled to do so out of financial necessity.
What’s at stake?
In terms of impacts on the labour force, the food and hospitality,
wood, and transportation sectors are some of those left understaffed
that are in need of more workers in Serbia. For the higher-skilled
workforce, a large number are composed of medical professionals
and IT specialists. Serbia produces more health workers than the
OECD-average, but the majority of current medical doctors are
considering leaving and there is already a lack of necessary spe-
cialists in some health sectors (Institute for Public Health of Serbia,
2015). Serbia’s youth-concentrated “brain drain,” especially in the
science, technology, and innovation sectors, results in a loss to the
country of around 1.2B Euro each year (WFD and IDI, 2019). Look-
ing at the broader Central and Eastern European (“CEE”) region,
Figure 5. Emigration Rates by Level of Education in Serbia
Source: Brückner, Capuano, and Marfouk, 2013.
0
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
Medium
Low
High
Serbian Emigration Rate by Education Level
44
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
the IMF found that emigration from 1995–2012 equated to cumula-
tive real GDP losses of 7% on average for countries in the region, as
well as broadly reduced competitiveness, and worsened productivi-
ty (Atoyan et al., 2016). Overall, these impacts underscore what is at
stake when the education system – the primary skills-forming insti-
tution in society – does not adequately align itself with needs of the
economy and people are left without fulfilling and experience-rele-
vant channels to make a living. Such coordination is done to varying
degrees across Europe, but it is those countries like Serbia with al-
ready high out-migration that can least afford the consequences of
not highly coordinating and aligning the education sector to the job
market. Any possible allocation of study spots or fundi