 of the Education System) and
thematic policies (Roma inclusion, children with special needs
in education, dropout prevention), as well as international or EU
accession instruments (such as SDG4, or accession chapter 23) al-
ready contain a rich set of such measures and their implementation
is usually weak.
The most important groups of measures from these, which need to
be accelerated, financed, facilitated, monitored, and periodically re-
vised, are the following:
-	 Additional human resources to support integration of vulnerable
groups: more pedagogical assistants, better functioning of in-
ter-sectoral committees, mobile support teams;
- Institutional reorganizations to prevent segregation (accelerating
the transformation or closure of special schools, desegregation of
Roma schools);
98 http://noks.mpn.gov.rs/en/2021/02/on-the-road-to-recognition-of-prior-learning-workshop-for-the-development-of-training-programs-based-on-the-qualification-standard/
139
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
- 	 Support to students (transportation, meals, free textbooks and oth-
er learning materials);
- Dropout prevention, early warning system, and modernized
and quality remedial classes need to be an integral part of every
school’s regular work, and they need to be planned, monitored, re-
ported on, and evaluated.99
In addition to this, a serious reconsideration of the tuitions, scholar-
ships, and student loans is needed, which implies their wider scope,
Analysis demonstrates that all these investments have a high return.
(UNICEF, 2014)
4.7.2 Essential resources: the teaching
profession, digitalization, financing, and
integrity
In order to ensure high quality learning outcomes, a far more ad-
vanced teacher policy has to be developed. This policy should ad-
dress the needs of teachers for higher salaries, stronger develop-
mental incentives, higher status, wellbeing and attractiveness of the
profession, better initial education and more effective professional
development coined to career advancement options, in parallel with
student needs for higher quality education.
As a prerequisite, a full and updated database of teachers is neces-
sary. The new legislation on pay grades should provide sufficient flex-
ibility in order to establish the link between career advancement and
salary coefficients, and thereby render the teaching profession more
attractive. Also, other areas of benefits for teachers need to be ex-
plored and implemented, such as targeted tax reductions, a reduced
teaching load, etc.
Teacher salaries need to be increased overall, as well as the GDP
share devoted to education. The education budget needs to have a
higher percentage for developmental costs, and innovative financing
mechanisms need to be explored.
Digital equipment, competencies, platforms, the curriculum, peda-
gogy and assessment modalities well-suited to the development of
student competencies in a digitalized education context, should be
prioritized. Lessons learned from the COVID-19 crisis in education
need to be analysed and used for the introduction of new elements.
Digitalization in education is an important crisis management and
resilience-building policy, but also a lasting asset for education devel-
opment. Hybrid models will be increasingly used for mitigating many
challenges, from rural education in remote areas, through catch up
and enrichment activities, and as part of regular schoolwork that
builds broadly defined student digital competencies.
The integrity of the education system is both a matter of appropriate
policies and enforcement mechanisms, and a matter of the willing-
ness of participants in the education system to comply. The improve-
ment of policies and enforcement mechanisms is highly dependent
on the availability of monitoring tools and analytical capacities in
governing institutions. Therefore, an effective Education Manage-
ment Information System is 