 arts adult education is provided by higher education insti-
tutions as short, non-degree courses. Universities have started estab-
lishing centres for continuous education, but offer and demand are
both still low. Informal learning that implies learning activities that
occur in the family, workplace or local community, or as part of dai-
ly life, on a self-directed, family-directed or socially directed basis is
also a type of learning that builds the human capital of a country. In
Serbia, formal recognition of informal learning has, admittedly, been
announced but it has not yet taken place.
There are substantial regional and rural-urban differences as well.
Belgrade municipalities take up more than half of the total coverage
(67% of all participants are involved in some form of adult education
in Belgrade municipalities). Higher participation is recorded in Som-
bor,  Leskovac, Novi Pazar, Čačak and Štrpce. However, it is clear that
the distribution of adult education services in primary and secondary
schools is very poor and that the majority of LSGs do not have any
kind of offer.
Formal secondary adult education for those without ISCED 3 was at-
tended by 447 adults in 2019, which is significantly less than the 2,776
places available. Out of the 23,772 places in secondary schools for pro-
grammes leading to qualifications, additional qualification and spe-
cializations in formal education, only 8,554 were filled.
An important step made in an effort to improve the quality of adult
education was the adoption of the Bylaw on closer conditions for
PROAEA, and the Bylaw on the pedagogical and andragogical as-
sistant. Aside from these documents directly focused on adult ed-
ucation, the Law on the National Qualifications Framework was
adopted and the Agency for Qualifications was established. Nev-
ertheless, in Serbia, skills audits indicating regular evaluation of
non-formal and informal learning are not yet the practice, despite
the 2012 Council Recommendation on the validation of non-formal
and informal learning, followed by two thirds of European countries
(Eurydice, 2021).
However, problems remain and present a significant barrier to quali-
ty LLL and adult education. Low participation in Serbia is the conse-
quence of several factors.
•	 Many programmes are not relevant for the labour market and
there is a lack of coordination between the qualifications offered
and the needs of employers80 (SRHS&GIZ, 2019). Programmes of-
fered by some PROAEA and NES are still not recognized or found
relevant by employers, which makes them useless for participants.
Promotional campaigns planned by the NES were insufficient and
did not reach all potential beneficiaries.
•	 Recognition of prior learning is still not regulated (it has been del-
egated to the Agency for Qualifications). Once this procedure is es-
tablished, many could obtain qualifications of levels 2, 3 and 5 that
are recognized by the National Qualifications Framework (NQF).
•	 Short cycle programmes, which would provide a certain number of
ECTS points that would cumulate for obtaining qualifications, are
not developed.
•	 Online education and blended learning81 is still limited in adult
education. This is a major obstacle as these programmes should
be the most flexible in terms of time and place where activities are
taking place. Also, the potentials of personalized learning, contex-
tualized learning82,and collaborative learning83 are rarely recog-
nized and utilized in adult education.
•	 Financial and organizational barriers to participation are signif-
icant. On average, across the EU-27, around one in three adults
who wanted to participate (or participate more) in education and
training (32.2 %) reported costs among the obstacles that prevent-
ed them from doing so (Eurydice, 2021). In Serbia in 2019 FAE
had 5,633 participants but only 2,930 finished (52%). Those who
did not, identified high transportation costs as major barrier and
the need to work part time jobs that