ng configura-
tions for educational programmes inherently require such calcula-
tions about the future.
It is too early to say what the consequences of the COVID-19 crisis
may be on migration patterns in Serbia. There is preliminary informa-
tion that around 400,000 Serbs living outside the country came back
to Serbia in March 2020, just before borders were closed. If accurate,
this would be a significant proportion of the Serbian diaspora return-
ing home. But at this stage it is unclear whether these individuals will
mostly return to their earlier workplaces outside Serbia or a sizeable
proportion of them will stay home in Serbia for longer. In any case,
this could be an opportunity for the government to produce incen-
tives and make attractive offers for them to stay in Serbia rather than
leave the country again. Government initiatives to support returnees
could include a number of efforts focused on maintaining diaspora
ties, hosting virtual job fairs and lowering administrative burdens of
return. However, these efforts cannot substitute fixing the underly-
ing causes driving people out of Serbia. To help solve the disconnect
between years spent in education and the lack of available jobs that
feed resentment and pessimism among youth particularly in Serbia,
the Serbian government has among other initiatives started promot-
ing dual education, which brings companies into the educational and
training process, as well as forming sectoral skill councils focused on
employment fields (Vasić, 2019). These actions are a healthy and nec-
essary development, and if successful in streamlining the transition
from student to worker, should be expanded throughout the voca-
tional and university systems.
Simulations for Serbia and the European Union confirm that to deal
with the future demographic changes of depopulation and ageing,
improving labour participation is key (Kupiszewski, Kupiszewska,
and Nikitovic, 2012; Lutz et al., 2019). Automation and increased
worker productivity offer additional strategies to thrive with a smaller
labor force. To harness human capital and maximise returns, it is in
the interest of Serbia to continue to further its efforts to consciously
and flexibly manage its education system to be responsive to labour
market needs, which works against the current skills mismatch and
is a source of common frustration that could be mediated by provid-
ing viable paths for Serbs to find experience-relevant livelihoods and
build fulfilling futures.
6  Pro-Natal Policies in Europe
As recently as the 1980s, Serbia had a birth rate at replacement level.
By 2018, the birth rate stood around 1.49 children per woman, indicat-
ing a variety of economic and cultural changes that have since priori-
tised other pursuits. Low fertility levels have concerned national gov-
ernments at least since the Franco-German conflict in the 1870s, as
described in the historical section. Once fertility levels in several Eu-
ropean cities and among specific ethnic sub-populations fell below the
replacement level of two surviving children per woman in the 1920s
and early 1930s, there was another wave of concern about the as-
sumed negative consequences of low fertility. Shifting national power
balances and economics drove the renewed focus on low fertility dur-
ing and after this time period, with policies attempting to counteract
the trend finding very different expressions in a variety of countries.
In Sweden the famous pro-natal population policies go back to Gun-
nar and Alva Myrdal’s work in the 1930s, which pointed to the fer-
tility-enhancing effect of a welfare state that incentivises women to
both participate in the workforce and also raise children, which was
a rather radical view at the time. A more authoritarian approach was
taken by Nazi Germany, which gave strong moral and material sup-
port to families with many children, with an explicit emphasis on
the benefits this was providing for the German nation. After World
War II, partly 