because of the excesses these policies were taken to in
Germany, in most countries the special fertility-enhancing policies
were no longer high on the policy agenda (except for France, where
pro-natalism was in fact strengthened). In the aftermath of World
War II these countries experienced the post-war baby boom, which
in the U.S. and many European countries brought fertility rates up to
three or more children per woman on average. This baby boom result-
ed from a combination of growth in early marriages (thus ending the
previous “European marriage pattern” characterised by late marriage
and high proportions of people never marrying) together with eco-
nomic growth and widespread optimism about the future.
During the 1970s, many European countries experienced rather sharp
declines in fertility rates. Because this decline coincided with the
introduction and broad use of the hormonal contraceptive pill, this
decline was even labelled the “Pillenknick” (meaning a bend in the
45
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
birth rate resulting from the pill) in German-speaking countries. But
the pill was only a more effective method of contraception than the
previous ones, and not the underlying reason for the decline in fertil-
ity rates which instead resulted from social and normative changes as
discussed above in the section on demographic transitions. Already
in 1978, an important book published by the Council of Europe, “Pop-
ulation Decline in Europe,” described the social changes unfolding
(Council of Europe, 1978).
An interesting quasi-natural experiment in pro-natal policy can be
tested by the comparison of the two German states, east and west,
split by the iron curtain. Up until around 1974, the two states shared
the same steep decline in fertility rates until the East German gov-
ernment decided to implement strong countermeasures, whereas
no new specific pro-natal policies were introduced in the West (Büt-
tner and Lutz, 1990). East German fertility showed a sharp recovery
whereas in West Germany fertility continued to decline. The effec-
tive policies in the East explicitly addressed a barrier to family life
(and thus desire for fertility), which was an acute housing shortage
for young couples (including those looking to start families). Every
woman got privileged government supported housing with the new
reforms as soon as she was pregnant, even irrespective of her marital
status. Together with generous financial support and childcare facil-
ities, these policies helped to turn around the decline in fertility in
East Germany. Interestingly, many female university students also
decided to have at least one child early on, contrary to the general
trend in industrialised societies, presumably in order to benefit from
these support measures. As a heritage of this pattern, even after Ger-
man unification, women in the Eastern part of Germany continued to
have their children much earlier than in the West.
In more recent decades, an increasing number of governments have
tried to raise fertility rates from below replacement fertility through
various forms of family-related policies. This increase in attention
at the level of national leadership is documented by regular surveys
taken by the Population Division of the UN Department of Econom-
ic and Social Affairs. This data shows that the share of countries in
the world stating that they have explicitly pro-natal policies has risen
from 10% in 1976 to 15% in 2001, and up to 28% by 2015. Such policies
range from direct pro-natalist campaigns to softer regulations that try
to help people to balance work and family life and have the number
of children that they consider personally ideal. A key differentiating
characteristic of policies across countries is whether they emphasise
general financial assistance, mandated flexibility to take parental
leave after childbirth, or the provision of childcare facili