reserve the health of
those who are less likely to live long and healthy lives and activate
its ageing population, if it manages to ensure more even regional
development and offer an economic and social perspective to all its
citizens, as it has been offered to the more privileged urban middle
and upper classes. That is why population-responsive policies must
primarily be inclusive development policies.
veloped districts of Southern and Southeastern Serbia are the lowest
ranked (Uvalić & Bartlett, 2021; Golić & Joksimović, 2017; Živanović
& Gatarić, 2017; Stamenković & Savić, 2017). Regional development
has a positive impact on industrial development and foreign direct
investment, which has led to an increase in the quality of jobs in less
developed regions, while there was a minimal growth of their share in
the total wages pool (Arandarenko, Aleksić & Lončar, 2021).
In addition to economic inequalities, there are broader social ine-
qualities. The Human Development Index, which was calculated at
the level of districts and regions for the purposes of this Human De-
velopment Report, clearly shows this (Nikitović, 2022). At the nation-
al level, the HDI is 0.806, ranking Serbia 64th globally. The regions
of Belgrade and Novi Sad are above the national average, while the
other two are below the national average. Only Belgrade can be com-
pared to a European country (Poland), while other parts of Serbia are
at the level of countries in the region, North Africa, the Caribbean
and East Asia.
Regional inequalities manifest themselves in many dimensions, from
the economy, through culture, to education. They are a permanent
feature of Serbian society and are historically rooted. Regional ine-
qualities drive internal migration, which in turn is a powerful driver
of regional depopulation. That is why balanced regional development
and the development of population policies that would be responsive
to local and regional particularities should guide the direction for re-
sponding to depopulation.
5  Message Three: Parts of Serbia Are in a Vicious
Circle of Depopulation and Slow Growth
22
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
6  Message Four: Medium-Sized Towns Are Key
for Balanced Demographic Development
7  Message Five: Today Gender Equality Is Part
of the Solution, not the Cause of the Problem
Although the public discourse is dominated by the topic of rural de-
population, in fact, much bigger challenges are posed by the decline
of medium-sized towns (30,000 to 100,000 inhabitants) and the
sustainable growth of large metropolitan areas. Mid-sized cities are
especially important because they represent a link between rural ar-
eas and small towns on the one hand, and larger cities that have re-
gional or international significance on the other. They are the bear-
ers of balanced regional development. In some of these cities there
is a demographic decline, and all of them are characterised by lower
wages, local revenues and investments in relation to the national av-
erage, and especially in relation to Belgrade and Novi Sad (Antonić,
2022). That is why this Human Development Report shows that the de-
mographic decline of medium-sized cities is a key demographic and
development problem for Serbia.
Like Serbia, depopulation is a problem in many European countries
that affects individual regions and cities more than the state as a
whole (Hospers & Reverda, 2014). Declining cities and regions face
a number of challenges related to future development, maintenance
of the local economy, utilisation of the construction fund and public
space, etc. Some of these processes have direct effects on the wellbe-
ing of families and individuals.
This Report analyses in detail the declining medium-sized Serbian
towns. The analysis demonstrates that there are considerable ine-
qualities in their social and economic capacities (for example, the lev-
el of development of