hic Change
Infertility is defined by the International Committee for Monitoring
Assisted Reproductive Technology (ICMART) and WHO as the fail-
ure to achieve a pregnancy after 12 months or more of regular unpro-
tected sexual intercourse (Zegers-Hochschild et al., 2009). Infertility
is a global problem and it affects a significant proportion of humanity.
Global infertility prevalence rates are difficult to determine, due to
the presence of both male and female factors which complicate any
estimate which may only address the woman and an outcome of a
pregnancy diagnosis or live birth (WHO, 2022b). WHO has calculat-
ed that over 10% of women are affected – women who have tried un-
successfully, and have remained in a stable relationship for five years
or more. Estimates in women using a two-year time frame, result in
prevalence values 2.5 times higher. The burden on men is unknown.
The overall burden of subfertility and infertility is significant, likely
underestimated, and has not displayed any decrease over the last 20
years (WHO, 2022c).103
According to the data of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evalu-
ation (IHME), University of Washington, one in every four couples
in developing countries was affected by infertility. A WHO study has
shown that the overall burden of infertility in women from 190 coun-
tries has remained similar in estimated levels and trends from 1990
to 2010 (IHME, 2022). Unfortunately, the data on infertility is not
available for the Republic of Serbia. As a result, we will rely on Euro-
pean estimates. Although these figures are not encouraging, the field
of reproductive medicine and endocrinology is rapidly growing, with
success stories that have resolved infertility and fertility problems –
methods of raising fertility awareness to more advanced innovations.
The availability of assisted reproduction technologies (ART) has
been evolving over the years, and their application in the Republic of
Serbia differs in fertility clinics which are covered by the Decree on
the Plan of the Health Institutions’ Network (public institutions) and
those outside the Plan of the Health Institutions’ Network (private
institutions). Since the end of 2006, the National Health Insurance
Fund (NHIF) has been financing the National Infertility Treatment
Programme. In the period from 2009 to 2017, the Ministry of Health
passed the Law on the Treatment of Infertility using Biomedically As-
sisted Fertilisation Procedures (2009) and a number of bylaws, while
in 2017 the Law on Biomedical Assisted Insemination (2017) was
adopted. In order for a couple, i.e. an insured person to be included
in the in vitro fertilization programme at the expense of the health in-
surance, either in public or private health care institutions, they must
meet the prescribed conditions (IPH, 2018).
According to the last available data, during 2017, the entitlement to
infertility treatment using ART was provided in 16 health institutions
(state and private-owned) that carried out 3,108 ART procedures,
which is 22% more than in the previous year. After private health in-
stitutions were introduced into the health insurance system in 2016,
there was a decrease in the total number of services provided in
public institutions, while the number of services provided in private
health care institutions increased significantly. One of the possible
explanations could be a better quality of care in private institutions
but also the question of privacy, that is, of patient anonymity.
Patients whose medical indications require any of the other technol-
ogies can access them at biomedically assisted fertilization (BAF)
centres that are outside the Network Plan at their own expense.101
According to statistics from the Report of the Special Monitoring
Body of the European Society for Human Reproduction and Embry-
ology (ESHRE), which analysed the work of clinics in 2013, 15 Serbian
clinics reported 2,720 cycles of in vitro fertilization and the
birth of 908 new-bor