 of many demogra-
phers and other analysts in terms of thinking about future fertility
levels has been strongly influenced by the numerical values provided
by the series of the widely used world population projections regular-
ly produced by the UN Population Division since the 1960s. These
projections reflected the dominant thinking at the time – that increas-
es in life expectancy would level off with the survival curve becoming
more and more rectangular but not shifting to the right and the fer-
tility of all countries would converge to a “Total Fertility Rate” (or,
“TFR”) of 2.1, the so-called replacement level of fertility, reflecting
a new long-term equilibrium that would be reached. These assump-
tions, together with the assumption of a future of little to no interna-
tional migration, resulted in a demographic outlook where in the long
run, after having gone through the turmoil of demographic transition,
every population would be in a stable equilibrium with no countries
shrinking or increasing. In the absence of any convincing alternative
narrative about the future, this set of assumptions made sense and
was also politically convenient in the context of the United Nations
(“UN”) because no government needed to be afraid of a future in
which their population would either shrink or grow indefinitely.
However, in recent decades all three assumptions that led to this pre-
dicted stability proved to be wrong. Life expectancy in an increasing
number of countries surpassed the previously assumed upper limits
(Oeppen and Vaupel, 2002), while migration has continued and even
increased over time in some regions. Additionally, fertility rates –
which are the most influential drivers of long-term demographic
trends – continued to fall below replacement level in almost every
country that has reached that threshold. As discussed in Section VI,
the replacement level of 2.1 is a theoretical construction, so it is un-
surprising it has no analogue in the real trends of any country, which
do not miraculously stop their decline once reaching replacement
level of 2.1, or other. As a consequence, most international population
projections now assume a convergence of fertility levels at a lower
level, such as a TFR of around 1.85 according to projections by the
UN and the Wittgenstein Centre for Demography and Global Human
Capital (the “Wittgenstein Centre”), a research institution focused on
such topics (United Nations 2019; WIC 2019). A set of new global pop-
ulation projections published in July 2020 by the Institute for Health
Metrics and Evaluation assumes that ultimate fertility levels will be
much lower, settling around 1.3 in most countries by the end of the
century (Vollset et al., 2020). But such alternative numbers for a long-
term post-transition fertility level are as arbitrary as the choice of 2.1
because there is simply no theoretical or empirical basis for choosing
an ultimate fertility level moving forward.
An influential article in 2009, however, showed that for a certain time
interval the TFR had a positive correlation with the Human Devel-
opment Index (“HDI”), after reaching a minimum level (Myrskylä
et al., 2009). This was taken as an indication that fertility would not
stay at very low levels, but instead recover to some extent as social
and economic development progressed. But the experience over the
last decade contradicts that assumption. South Korea, which showed
the most rapid progress in socio-economic development, had further
declining TFRs, which in 2018 reached the lowest national level of
any country at 0.98 children per woman and in 2019 even further de-
creased to 0.92 children per woman. Some of the highly developed
countries in Northern Europe that also used to have relatively high
fertility, such as Finland and Norway, saw steep TFR declines over
the past few years.
Figure 2 summarises the most recent fertility trends in different parts
of Europe and the United States. It clearly indicates a departure f