of medical professionals to Western Europe-
an countries. If, in such a context, additional education programmes
were to be introduced for nurses to specialize in areas relating to the
needs of the elderly, there is a risk of them leaving the country fol-
lowing completion of training. Even with the risk of educated people,
trained for work with the elderly, leaving the country, effort, primarily
financial, but also in respect of other benefits also, needs to be invest-
ed in order to retain such staff in the country, given that the labour
market demand for such a trained profile is at a high level. In addition
to institutions for the elderly, they can be employed in all medical in-
stitutions where there is a geriatrics ward.
The health care system in Serbia is facing rising costs of care for the
elderly, i.e. there are insufficient funds for financing all entitlements
guaranteed by health insurance. This situation undoubtedly requires
the implementation of the necessary health care system reforms, pri-
marily in the field of financing, but also in the field of strengthening
the institutions of voluntary health insurance. More intensive use of
private health insurance services could provide more equal access to
health care services for all segments of the population, which primar-
ily refers to the release of state resources for the poorer population.
The private sector, both as a service provider and as a source of fi-
nancing for health spending, is insufficiently covered in the National
Health Account.115 Therefore, data collection for the private sector
and its inclusion in linked accounts is one of the important issues to
which special attention should be paid in order to obtain a more accu-
rate picture of the total health care expenditures at the national level.
The health care system also requires reorganization in the field of
palliative care organization for older persons. Although palliative
care is implemented by allocating a number of beds for palliative care
in primary and secondary care, and providing home care services at
the local level in the most remote places with older populations, this
type of health care requires further reorganization in terms of capac-
ity building (re infrastructure, organization and personnel), in order
to adapt to the new demographic reality. The introduction of mobile
teams that would provide palliative care and home treatment services
is one of the potential solutions in the absence of adequate resources.
Today, there is growing evidence on the best management technique
for complex chronic conditions in the elderly. The key issues are the
coordination of care in all settings and the promotion of self-help
162
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
(where possible), the development of appropriate staff and, in par-
ticular, the optimal combination of skills, but also information sup-
port systems and funding mechanisms that encourage integration
rather than fragmentation of different sectors. Increased health liter-
acy and better access to technology, such as computers and the Inter-
net, can help improve understanding and enable patients to become
more involved in self-care (Rechel et al. 2009). Much can be achieved
through relatively simple interventions, such as those that facilitate
mobility through the use of assistive technology.
Insufficient knowledge of digital technologies, i.e. lack of digital liter-
acy, as well as fear of possible misuse of data, can lead to resistance to
the use of telemedicine services. Bearing in mind that not all health
workers and users in the health care system are ready to accept and
use telemedicine services as a means of distance communication, it
is necessary to legally regulate and standardize which services can
be provided by means of telemedicine and how. Thereby, firstly pa-
tients, and then the medical staff, also, will be sure that the services
provided th