hat could
most plausibly have influenced these outcomes.
Migration decisions are also heavily influenced by the availability of
migration options in the destination countries, for potential migrants
overall and for certain groups among them. Thus, we also try to infer
from the available data whether the size and structure of recent em-
igration from Serbia was primarily influenced by the so-called push
factors (the most important among them being the probability of em-
ployment and expected earnings in the origin country) or by pull fac-
tors (expected earnings and probability of employment in the poten-
tial destination country, as well as the ease of migration determined
by the destination country’s immigration policy).
On the demand (pull) side in receiving countries, the full recovery of
the economy from the Great Recession occurred only in 2013, which
after a long low tide pushed the demand for labour, most strongly in
Germany as the economic engine of the EU. The recovery, facilitating
the expansion demand for labour, coincided with the retirement of
large baby-boom cohorts, which in turn increased the replacement
demand for labour.
4  Demand (Pull) and Supply (Push) Factors of
Work Migrations
109
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
56 According to the Balance of Payments Manual (IMF 2008) ‘personal remittances’ include ‘personal transfers’ which comprise workers ‘remittances’ and compensation of
employees, that is net income being generated through employment in other economies, either as seasonal or border worker, or as resident with non-resident entities (e.g.
international institutions domiciled in the resident’s home economy).
In January 2016, faced with critical lack of workforce, Germany intro-
duced the so called ‘Western Balkans Regulations’. It gives citizens of
the Western Balkan countries, including Serbia, the chance to take up
employment in Germany, provided that they have a binding job offer
and the approval of the Federal Employment Agency (BA). Even be-
fore that, medical workers were coming in organized way through the
‘Triple win’ programme based on 2013 bilateral agreement between
German and Serbian employment services. The major novelty of the
new regulation was that, unlike in other third countries, there were
no requirements regarding the workers’ professional qualifications.
This regulation, initially valid until the end of 2020, was extended to
the end of 2023.
The labour market integration of those working in Germany on the
basis of the Western Balkans regulation was evaluated as a success in
terms of employment stability and earnings compared to both other
groups of migrants and German job entrants. The proportion of those
who are unemployed and those receiving benefits in Germany is low-
er than that of all other groups of migrants (IAB, 2020).
Great recession was felt somewhat less strongly in Central Europe.
Still, with the recovery in Western Europe, work migration flows from
NMS to OMS intensified again, creating severe labour shortages in
sending countries. Unlike the OMS which manage to neutralize their
natural population decline with positive migration balance (which
through the higher fertility rate of migrants tends to additionally im-
prove the population balance), in most NMS, natural population de-
clines and negative emigration balance goes hand in hand.
In the second half of the past decade, more advanced NMS managed
to slow down or reverse the negative migration balance, pursuing
more aggressively the policy of importing temporary labour force, es-
pecially from Ukraine, but also from the Western Balkans and other
low-wage regions. The crude rate of net migration (the ratio of net mi-
gration including statistical adjustment during the year to the average
population in that year per 1,000 persons) for the region as a whole
turned positive in 2018.
Thus, the demand for foreign labour in NMS can be