 economic growth and good government are more
important than specifics of pension design (Barr, 2021). Barr even ar-
gues that, in case of predominant investment in government bonds,
funded schemes become PAYG, as the payment of current insured
persons’ pensions will depend on future taxpayers (Barr, 2002:9).
In strategic decision-making on the size of each pillar, it is worth
noting that in private schemes ‘the risks of longevity, inflation, and
financial (mis)management and market volatility are all borne by the
future retiree’ (Hinrichs & Lynch, 2010: 366). It is also necessary to
take into account expenditure on direct subsidies and revenues lost
owing to tax incentives granted to encourage saving in private pen-
sion funds. EU reports warn that reforms aimed at promoting supple-
mentary retirement savings should consider not only fiscal implica-
tions, but also redistribution effects, given the composition of private
pension scheme clients, which is not gender-neutral and includes a
higher proportion of males, more affluent individuals and permanent
employees (EPC-SPC, 2020).
In the context of the third pillar at least three questions should be
considered. First, what is the scope for supplementary savings and
how can it be created in the context of high contributions and high
contribution base ceiling in the first pillar (5 times the average wage)?
Second, would direct subsidies instead of tax incentives also encour-
age lower-wage earners to invest in private pensions and how preva-
lent is the problem of inadequate financial literacy? And third, is the
introduction of automatic enrolment in voluntary private pension
schemes part of the solution and what does it, in fact, bring?145
142 Although the use of privatization revenues appeared to be an attractive option to cover transition costs it was sufficient only in part or only for a relatively short period
(World bank, 2005:4).
143 For more details, see Altiparmakov & Matković (2018).
144 In the case when a large generation is followed by a smaller one, Barr explains how the value of the accumulation, and thus the annuity, will decrease ‘Suppose that
every couple has one child; thus each couple of the next generation will inherit two apartments and, other things equal, apartment values will fall’ (Barr, 2012:168).
145 This mechanism has resulted from research showing that participation in supplementary pension schemes is significantly hampered by procrastination and inertia. In
the EU, automatic enrolment has been introduced in Germany, Italy, Poland, Lithuania and the UK (OECD, 2019a).
172
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
2.5  A break with Bismarck
An explicit shift from a Bismarckian social insurance to a Beveridgean
basic income pension is not a common reform option. In a number of
countries, however, reform processes have been found to imply a silent
shift from one to the other, and similar tendencies are observed in Ser-
bia too, given the significant increase in vertical redistribution within
the system and the decline in current and perspective net replacement
rates (Matković & Stanić, 2020). Consumption smoothing as a key pen-
sion system goal is thus passed on from the public to the private sector.
In the basic Beveridgean variant, full system transformation would
involve providing all citizens with equal basic pensions which can
vary by length of pensionable service, but are non-contributory and
budget-funded, while the private sector would provide consumption
smoothing (Ebbinghaus, 2021).
A break with Bismarck, both explicit and implicit, raises at least
three issues. Firstly, the issue of transition cost, given that the pres-
ent generations, especially older ones, who have paid contributions
on a base of up to 5 times the average wage, expect to achieve the
consumption smoothing goal through the public pension system
(and are entitled to it). Secondly, the question which 