of these servic-
es in municipalities where they are not available at all, as well as en-
courage the development of services such as old person day care and
supportive housing, which are almost non-existent. Reviewing the
concept of earmarked transfers is an important prerequisite for the
development of community-based services.
The area of institutional care is burdened by many outstanding is-
sues, including prices in care homes, beneficiaries and their families’
contribution towards care costs, cross-sectoral links to the health sys-
tem, potential shortage of middle-level medical staff, and strategic
approach to the role of this form of old-age care.152 One proposal is to
reserve institutional care only for the older persons with the highest
support needs provided that community-based services are devel-
oped. Rapid private sector development, waiting lists for public care
homes and comparatively low coverage of older people by this form
of care indicate that now is the crucial time to elaborate the institu-
tional care concept more thoroughly.
3.2.2	 Cash benefits
Three types of cash benefits for LTC are available in Serbia. They dif-
fer in terms of grounds for eligibility, funding source (budget or in-
surance) and amount. The non-contributory attendance allowance is
awarded to those who were not insured, the contributory LTC benefit
is an insurance-based entitlement, and the augmented attendance
allowance is targeting individuals with the most severe disabilities,
available to recipients of both of the previous two benefits, either in
the full amount or as a top-up. According to 2019 data, the contributo-
150 In 2016, the government adopted a decree on earmarked transfers that specifies the criteria and rules for the allocation of additional funds to local governments for
social care services that are in their mandate.
151 In this context, it is worth considering UK experiences with the introduction of national minimum eligibility criteria rather than giving local governments discretion
with regard to needs assessment (European Commission, 2019: 497).
152 Some of these issues are addressed in more detail in the draft version of Deinstitutionalization Strategy (Ministarstvo za rad, zapošljavanje, boračka i socijalna pitanja (2021).
174
C H A P T E R 7
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
ry LTC benefit amounted to 61% of the minimum wage (RSD 16,500
equivalent to €140),153 and the augmented allowance – to 107% (ap-
prox. RSD 28,800 equivalent to €245). The coverage of older persons
stood at approximately 4.5%, primarily under the contributory LTC
benefit (approx. 57 thousand recipients, i.e. 4% of the population
aged 65+). The adequacy of the augmented allowance is at an appro-
priate level, as this benefit is intended to cover the forgone earnings
of family members who stay out of the labour market to care for a
child/person with disability. Recipients may use the benefits at their
discretion, without monitoring, as in most EU countries (European
Commission, 2019).
One possibility in cash benefit reforms is to disconnect the LTC ben-
efit entitlement from the pension and disability insurance system. As
the level of PDI contributions is set by the law governing contribu-
tions, rather than determined in such a way as to cover all the entitle-
ments available to recipients,154 the question is whether the contribu-
tory LTC benefit is truly an insurance-based entitlement, or whether
it is, in fact, funded from tax revenues, through budget transfers to
the pension fund. The suggestion is certainly to at least review the
status of current recipients who were granted the right under previous
laws, among whom some groups receive very low amounts (Matković
& Stanić, 2014). Their possible transfer to non-contributory part of
the system would simplify the administration of top-up payments to
recipients with most severe disabilities. In most EU countries, LTC
ben