er efficient instruments to reduce poverty and ensure adequate
old-age income. Another challenge lies in including part-time work-
ers, those with longer unemployment spells or working on a succes-
sion of temporary contracts in the scheme (Holzmann, 2017). If there
are life expectancy disparities by socio-economic status, a formula
that takes into account average remaining life expectancy is inade-
quate (Holzmann et al., 2019).
If this option were looked into more closely in Serbia, it should be not-
ed that the same types of reforms are possible within all three closely
related variants of earnings-related systems (OECD, 2005:72), in par-
ticular points and NDC systems (Boulhol, 2019), and that the change
would be technically highly demanding and would also probably
require considerable time to reach a political consensus. Hence, it is
more efficient to incorporate certain properties of the NDC scheme
into the existing system.
2.4  Privatisation and introduction
of the second pillar
On World Bank recommendation, during the 1990s transition, most
Central and Eastern European countries introduced mandatory insur-
ance in private pension funds with the idea of pension system reliance
on three pillars. The reform entailed redirecting a portion of contribu-
tions from the first pillar (PAYG) to private individual accounts (sec-
ond pillar), while incurring a transitional cost. Part of this cost was cov-
ered through decelerated pension bill growth, resulting in relatively
low pensions and low ratio of public expenditure on pensions in these
countries (World Bank, 2005:5), and part by sovereign debt, to cover
the first pillar deficit.142 The global financial crisis turned the spot-
light on financing problems, while also revealing administrative and
institutional inefficiencies (OECD, 2013.:11). Pressured by the crisis,
indebtedness and transition cost, most Central and Eastern European
countries discontinued or significantly reduced the second pillar. In
the context of some countries abandoning the second pillar, the latest
OECD report on pensions even states that ‘the current context of low
long-term yields might call for revisiting the trade-offs between PAYG
and funded components’ (OECD, 2019:38). European institutions
warn that reforms aimed at promoting supplementary pension saving
should ‘avoid substitution of public pensions’ (EPC-SPC, 2020:43).
In the early 2000s, in the first wave of reforms, Serbia dismissed the
introduction of the second pillar,143 and the rationale for its intro-
duction was subsequently analysed and substantiated in detail, with
emphasis on high transition costs, estimated at between 0.6% and
1.7% of the GDP per year, during more than 40 years (Matković et
al., 2009).
If it is acknowledged that the pension privatisation model involving
the redirection of contributions from the first to the second pillar was
a failed experiment (ILO, 2018), a crucial issue in Serbia is the propor-
tion of the first (public PAYG) to the third (private, funded) pillar, and
measures that may need to be taken to facilitate the diversification of
funding sources for old-age savings. According to National Bank of
Serbia data and analyses (Narodna banka Srbije, 2020), the number
of active insured persons under private pension schemes is currently
low; private pension funds mainly invest in government bonds, and
possibilities for portfolio diversification are limited.
In many papers, Barr stresses that funding does not provide a re-
sponse to demographic challenges, since it may preserve the nominal
value of savings in individual accounts, but not necessarily their pur-
chasing power (Barr, 2012:157)144, and that demographic shocks affect
all pension schemes, in both public and private sector (Barr & Dia-
mond, 2006:21, 32-33) (Barr, 2012:166). In his latest paper, he stressed
that in both PAYG and funded schemes workers   are trying to secure
their consumption in retirement by building claims on future pro-
duction and that