eople
aged 65 to 74 (Milić et al., 2021). Such data clearly point to the lack of
capacity of health and social services to provide adequate and timely
care and assistance to older persons, and to meet their needs for the
use of home care and assistance services, and for palliative care.
“Palliative care is another type of health care that includes care for
patients with severe, chronic diseases, most often in the terminal
stages of diseases that have a progressive course (cardiovascular
disease, malignant diseases, diabetes, neuromuscular, cerebro-
vascular diseases, HIV/AIDS, traffic injuries and others), as well as
their families. The Strategy for Palliative Care (2009) adopted in
2009 included palliative care into the health system of the Republic
of Serbia, and its goal was to strengthen, in respect of organization
and personnel the existing home treatment and care services at the
primary level of health care, establishment of home treatment and
care services where they did not exist. (in 88 primary health care cen-
tres). At the secondary level, the establishment of special palliative
care units within the department for extended treatment and care
was envisaged, as well as an increase in bed capacity for palliative
care (40 beds per 1,000,000 residents). The Decree on the plan of
the network of health institutions defines the total bed fund for ex-
tended treatment and care, which includes geriatrics, palliative care,
chemotherapy, physical medicine and rehabilitation, but there is no
data on the exact number of beds provided for palliative care. For
comparison, in the European Union, which has a very similar demo-
graphic trend, the estimated palliative care capacity is 80 beds per
1,000,000 residents (Radbruch et al., 2010).
In the absence of sufficient bed capacity for palliative care in health
institutions, the care of persons in need of palliative care is taken
over by the social welfare system. Due to the lack of capacity of the
health system or the inability of the family to adequately care for the
sick family member, the older persons mostly end up in social
care accommodation institutions (founded by the Republic of Serbia
or the Autonomous Province of Voivodina, but also in private homes
for the elderly). This is not an ideal solution due to insufficient health
care staff and lack of standards, but it is often the only solution for
both the patients and their families. Institutions for the accommoda-
tion of the older population thus unofficially become socio-health in-
stitutions, for which there is a legal basis, but standards have not yet
been adopted. As the largest number of patients in these wards con-
sists of the oldest population, and bearing in mind the percentage
of the old population that is increasing from year to year, palliative
health care requires additional reorganization in terms of capacity
building (infrastructure, organization and staffing) to adapt to the
age structure of the population.
112 Functional limitations represent the basis for the assessment of the population health in terms of capacity for daily functioning regardless of the reasons for the limitation
(congenital limitations, limitations brought on by illness, accident, aging, etc.)
157
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
In 2020, the world faced a pandemic113 of a new type of corona virus,
SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease COVID-19. Healthcare organ-
izations and healthcare workers were the first to be hit by this newly
discovered disease. The early response to COVID-19 in Serbia was
based on the strong existing framework of the Law on Public Health
(2016). Adequate emergency response and disease control systems,
highly qualified teams of public health professionals at the  Institute
of Public Health, and a network of 24 regional public health institutes
helped delay the onset and magnitude of the outbreak in Serbia.
Although the health sec