
While it is true that youth employment has been increasing since 2013,
the average quality of youth jobs, both in terms of job security and
wages, was not enough to reduce emigration impulses.
The revision of the adopted narrative of enormous emigration of high-
ly educated ‘talents’ and the shift of focus to the accelerated departure
of middle-educated young people are important because they point to
the need to explore neglected and insufficiently illuminated sources
of frustration of ‘ordinary’ graduates. These different sources of frus-
tration come from one common source - the lack of intergenerational
solidarity at the expense of children and young people. It is manifested
in many aspects. Public expenditures on education are very low, and
some important groups of poor, especially minority and rural youth
do not have a fair chance for a successful start in life. The transition
from education to labour market is not sufficiently supported by ac-
tive labour market policy (Aleksić et al., 2020). Overly flexibilized la-
bour legislation and employment practices direct young people to the
secondary labour market and precarious jobs, leading to widespread
exploitation of youth and student work. As explained, low wages face
high fiscal burden, affecting more young workers. Concerning the
pension insurance system, the entire burden of solidarity is shifted to
intergenerational solidarity while intra-generational solidarity among
retirees and old people hardly exists.
115
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
59 https://analyticshelp.io/blog/global-internet-freelance-market-overview-2018/
On the other hand, Serbia is emerging as the ICT hub in the region
thanks to favourable tax treatment of ICT sector, generous invest-
ment and start-up subsidies, high investment in human capital in ICT
and higher integration into global values chains. The annual numbers
of graduates in ICT are above 2.5 thousand and Serbia has demon-
strated to be quite successful at attracting and retaining ICT profes-
sionals. Young and highly educated people with university degrees in
economics, design, marketing, architecture, and engineering make
up the majority of digital workers in Serbia. The contribution of ICT
exports is estimated at 2.5% of GDP in 2018 and in 2020 – a pandemic
year - the contribution of the sector rose to 5.4 %. In the case of the
ICT sector, the linkages between migration and human capital en-
hancement are well established and can be considered a success sto-
Serbia’s migration balance over the past decade has been clearly
negative, but far from catastrophic or excessive as often claimed. If it
were not ageing and demographically declining country, Serbia could
be assessed as a very efficient and successful exporter of labour.
For an emigration country, the share of its citizens living abroad is
relatively moderate (around 14% of resident population), while the
share of remittances is a sizeable 8% of the country’s national income
(excluding real estate purchases via foreign accounts which are sta-
tistically registered as FDI). This ’remittance intensity ratio’ is very
favourable globally and is best among the Western Balkan countries.
It indicates the dominance of temporary work migration motives
among the migrants and their efficient choice of destinations.
From the Eurostat-Europe data on different dimensions of migration
flows of Serbian citizens, we have concluded that there was a rapid in-
crease in the gross outflow of emigrants from Serbia, especially in the
second half of the past decade. This increase was manifested through two
major changes in the structures and spatial distribution of emigrants from
Serbia. First, migration for work has become the dominant category of
migration flows. Second, this rapid growth of temporary work migrations
was most pronounced towards Germany, on the one hand, and towards a
larger number of new EU member 