 in-
creased by an order of magnitude by 2010 and remained elevated un-
til recently. Diminutive amounts of social assistance and restrictions
in access to child benefits have certainly been push factors for the
poor, especially Roma from Southern Serbia, to engage in repeated
asylum seeking migrations. This is only one aspect of miserable sit-
uation of the Roma people, who are almost invariably excluded from
access to formal labour market and exposed to various forms of dis-
crimination and general neglect. As a synthetic illustration, the Roma
life expectancy shortfall was estimated at 12.4 years compared with
general population (Raković, 2015). A recent research on substandard
settlements documents the absence of basic services such as electric-
ity, clean running water and sewerage (SIPRU, 2020).
It is less obvious but nonetheless straightforward from Roy’s model,
that thrifty child benefits in Serbia, if one is able to obtain them at
all, compared with most often fully universal and far more gener-
ous child benefits in most Western European countries58, widen the
total earnings gap between staying in Serbia and leaving abroad and
translate into even greater incentives to emigrate from Serbia with
children, not only for Roma, but for much wider groups of low- and
medium-skilled migrant workers. Furthermore, targeted child bene-
fits in Serbia act as a deterrent to joining the formal labour force; this
undesirable effect would be eliminated if child benefits were fully
universal or only affluence-tested.
During the past decade, until recently, the minimum wages were kept
at the level of 40-45% of average gross wage, neither low nor high
in international comparisons. However, because of regressive labour
taxation and excessively high tax wedge at the level of the minimum
wage, its net amount was comparatively less, reducing dispropor-
tionally the take-home wage of Serbian low-wage workers, while the
total labour cost of minimum wage (gross wage plus employer con-
114
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
tributions) was higher, negatively impacting the competitiveness of
employers in low-wage firms. This in turn discouraged investment in
labour-intensive industries, creating a vicious circle in which relative
position of people with lower educational attainment was further
worsened because of reduced demand for their services.
What makes manufacturing jobs in countries like Slovakia, Czech,
Hungary or Poland, typically paying a monthly wage of below
or around EUR 1,000, so attractive to temporary, mostly medi-
um-skilled VET migrants from Serbia? First, the average and median
real-wage levels in most NMS increased steadily throughout most of
this decade, while in Serbia they remained rather flat throughout the
whole period. Second, as a practical example of Roy’s model, while
skill-adjusted public-sector wages in Serbia are much higher than
those in the private sector, the opposite is true in most, if not all, NMS.
While the salary of a Slovak teacher might be around 50% higher than
that of their counterpart in Serbia, a worker in a Slovak car plant can
make around twice as much as a similar worker in Serbia. Further-
more, the labour taxation system in Serbia, when comparing labour
tax wedges, is less favourable to low- and medium-wage labour com-
pared with these systems in the NMS.
A recent paper explored the key policy intervention designed to
‘repair’ the deficiencies of labour demand – generous subsidies for
(mostly) foreign direct investment aiming to attract investors to low-
wage sectors and low-wage regions by offering relatively generous
subsidies per job created, further differentiated by offering more gen-
erous subsidies to investors located in less developed regions (Aran-
darenko, Aleksić and Lončar, 2021). Such policy has contributed to
overall sectoral rebalancing of the labour market by increasing the
demand for manufactur