 that align ITE to dominant practices in the member states of the
EU, were introduced in 2003 and 2009. They require an MA degree
from teachers87 of a 30 ECTS module for professional studies of psy-
chological, pedagogical and methodological disciplines coupled with
a 6 ECTS practice in educational institutions, which is a modest re-
quirement, compared to EU wide practice.88 Both changes are very
slow in their implementation, despite sizeable support from Europe-
an assistance through TEMPUS and IPA projects. The Development
of relevant accreditation standards is also stalled allowing for hap-
hazard practices to mushroom, endangering the quality of teacher
preparation (Kovač Cerović,   Radišić & Stanković, 2016).
On the other hand, the professional development of teachers in Ser-
bia is a well-developed policy, established during the early 2000’s
and widely distributed since then. Catalogues offer accredited
courses of diverse providers (NGOs,faculties, institutes, businesses,
teacher associations, schools), teachers select among these in as per
to a self-assessment of their own competencies, and accumulate 120
hours or more of divers training on a 5-year basis. More training is
linked to the career ladder, less training jeopardizes the teachers’ li-
cense. The implementation of this policy is frequently endangered by
lacking financial resources and the quality is hampered by a lack of
monitoring, particularly the monitoring and evaluation of the impact
of the trainings on the teaching process. Therefore,  the effectiveness
of the investments in trainings (both time and resources) might be-
come questionable and render this, otherwise powerful and high im-
pact measure, less useful than it could be.
A system of induction and licensing is in place in Serbia, while, as already
mentioned, career advancement, although regulated by laws and bylaws
is not connected to salary increase, therefore not many teachers have
embarked on the complex process of acquiring higher career levels.
In summary, there is a serious need to reconsider, reform and re-
invent the teaching profession in Serbia in all of its aspects – in re-
spect of finances, work conditions and autonomy, and the quality of
teacher education. Without such focused  reconstruction of this field,
many other reforms will be stalled, major investments in human re-
sources lost, and the development of human capital in Serbia addi-
tionally jeopardized.
4.2  Digital transformation in and
through education as a resource in
human capital development in the
context of depopulation
Digital technologies have changed economies and societies global-
ly during the last 20 years. Initially, Serbia lagged behind as a conse-
quence of the 90’s, but is swiftly catching up with a vibrant IT sector.
The value of Serbia’s IT export grew from 0.5% of GDP in 2007 to 2.5%
in 2018 (Arandarenko, 2020). Although IT professionals have an easy
road to migrating to developed countries, Serbia has, to date, managed
to build and retain a pool of professionals and talents in this area. In
the academic year 2020/21, around 10% of all students are enrolled
in higher education institutions focusing on information technologies
(23,061 out of 242,550), while almost 20% of graduated students were
from IT study tracks (3,174 out of 16,010) (SORS, 2021). This demon-
strates both the attractiveness and high efficiency of these studies.
In the context of depopulation, it is paramount to capitalize on this
trend, and further broaden and strengthen the pool of professionals
in the IT sector. Reforms in the education sector, particularly if based
on the EU Action Plan 2021-2027 are major vehicles for further de-
veloping the digital competencies of the population. Lessons learned
from the worldwide and Serbian experiences with the COVID-19
emergency distance education can substantially contribute to these
reforms, as well.
The area of digitalization in education in Serbia is addressed in three
recent partly ove