w into Germany of almost 50,000
people in the period 2011-2018. However, this apparent net inflow is
most likely a statistical artefact as a result of gradual attrition of the
categories ‘former Yugoslavia’ and ‘Serbia and Montenegro’ as coun-
tries of origin which last appeared in German stock statistics in 2016.
Simply put, former Yugoslav citizens already in Germany were reclas-
sified into Serbian citizens during this period.
Assuming that the migration balance with the rest of the world out-
side ‘Eurostat-Europe’ is about neutral,  annual net outflow of Serbian
citizens in the past decade would be in the range 4-13,000 persons,
based on two presented estimation exercises for Eurostat-Europe.
This wide band can be trimmed from both sides. If we assume that
‘true’ migration balance with Germany is about neutral, this would
put the net outflow estimates in the past decade at somewhere be-
tween 50-70,000 persons – that is, some 5-7,000 per year. We shall
further deal with these problems in the context of migration flow
analysis in Section 3.
55 This is no surprise, since SORS used a set of varied sources depending on data availability and responses to its questionnaire aimed at national statistical offices, diverse
calculation methods including modelling exercises and imputations and somewhat different definitions. The main purpose of the SORS exercise was to get the net migra-
tion balance to be used in the calculation of total population dynamics for the period 2011-2018 and population projections from 2019 onwards.
104
C H A P T E R 4
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
3.1  Evolving migration flows from
Serbia
Referring to the influx of guest workers into Western Europe during
the 1960s and 1970s, Swiss playwright Max Frisch famously quipped
through one of his characters – ’We wanted workers; but the people
arrived’. Inevitably, the features of work capabilities and skills come
in the package with other human dimensions, as Frisch aptly for-
mulated. Interactions between locals and guest workers could not
be limited only to workplaces and only for a defined period of time.
Many foreign workers managed to stay despite formal limitations and
to settle in West Germany and other Western European countries.
Workers from SFRY (including Serbia) were part and parcel of large
post-war inflow of temporary migrants, many of whom remained in
Western Europe throughout their work careers, until retirement and
beyond.
Migration flows slowed down in 1970s and 1980s – mostly due to
receiving-country restrictions imposed as a consequence of the rise
in unemployment due to economic crisis and reduction in labour
demand.
The 1990s brought about large turnaround in migration trends
caused by the violent dissolution of SFRY. Due to economic collapse
and general political insecurity there had been a large emigration of
both ‘workers’ and ‘people’ throughout the decade - with often inter-
twined economic, family and humanitarian reasons. This wave was
dominantly supply (push) driven. Wages in Serbia dropped the most
for highly educated middle class urban workers. Consequently, new
faraway destinations such as Canada and Australia gained in impor-
tance because their point immigration system favoured high-skilled
emigrants.
At the same time, people were immigrating to Serbia in large num-
bers – mostly ethnic Serbs from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovi-
na, where humanitarian and family reasons dominated. After 1999,
many internally displaced persons from Kosovo and Metohija (espe-
cially outside of northern part) became residents of Central Serbia
and Vojvodina, further balancing mechanical losses due to emigra-
tion. In 2000s emigration continued at a somewhat slower pace, driv-
en by combination of economic and family reasons, and the EU again
regained full dominance as the main destination area, while overseas
Anglo-Saxon countries lost in importance. Some new minor destin