and the other consisting al-
most completely of their descendants resulting from the projection
assumptions applied to current population pyramid. In this way, it is
possible to fully perceive the effects of fertility change, which is the
crucial long-term factor of population change.
Official estimates of the Serbia’s population by sex and single age
groups at the district level as of 31 December 2020 were taken as the
basis for calculating the initial age and sex population structure in
the projection (SORS, 2021a). These estimates are based on the 2011
census and the subsequent changes of the population structure that
have been induced by births, deaths and internal migration between
the census day and the end of 2020. Given that the estimates thus ob-
tained did not include the impact of international migration, which
is particularly important for high emigration areas, it was necessary
to correct them by including the previously stated assessment of the
balance of international migration between 30 September 2011 (the
Census Day) and 31 December 2020.
2  Scenarios of Population Dynamics – Future
Fertility, Mortality, and Migration
The three scenarios of future population dynamics in Serbia are as
follows: a) baseline scenario – the most probable future excluding
any consideration of specific policy impacts; b) high fertility scenar-
io – reflecting a fully successful implementation of policies aimed at
increasing birth numbers; c) zero migration scenario – an imaginary
future of zero net migration as a reference case for assessing the mi-
gration effect (Table 4). All three scenarios share the same assump-
tion on future mortality because of the relatively stable change in this
component,24 and because of the focus of this chapter on the depop-
ulation in Serbia – largely caused by a long period of low fertility and
net emigration. This allows to assess the effects of fertility and migra-
tion independently of each other by comparing the b) and c) scenario
with the baseline one.
24 The short-term effect of the COVID-19 pandemic has been considered (see 2.1.2).
25 Non-commercial software was used for all projection-related calculations. Probabilistic simulations of trajectories of TFR and e0, as a tool for formulating the baseline
fertility and mortality scenarios, were performed using R and its packages bayesTFR (Ševčíková et al. 2015) and bayesLife (Ševčíková and Raftery 2015). Projections of the
population by age and sex at the district level in Serbia were calculated using Spectrum.
Scenario
Fertility
Mortality
Migration
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
High fertility
High fertility
Baseline
Baseline
Zero migration
Baseline
Baseline
Zero migration
Table 4. Assumptions in the population dynamic scenarios in Serbia,
2020-2100
2.1  Baseline scenario
The baseline scenario assumes a relatively small increase in future fer-
tility and slowly improving survival rates. When formulating assump-
tions on the natural components of population change, we relied on
the probabilistic models used to produce the current World Population
Prospects by the United Nations’ Population Division (hereinafter: the
UN model)25 (United Nations, 2019a), thus avoiding subjective judg-
ment typical for the scenario approach. The future paths of total fer-
tility rate in the baseline scenario and life expectancy at birth in all
scenarios represent the most likely trajectories from their prediction
intervals derived by running the UN model.  Given the limited quality
and availability of time series on migration and far greater uncertain-
ty about their future trends, especially at the sub-national level and in
the longer term, compared to the natural components of population
change (births and deaths), only one pathway of future migration is
66
C H A P T E R 2
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
formulated. A theoretical concept called “migration cycle model”,
as a specific interp