evelopment in Response to Demographic Change
pared Law on climate change in March 2021. Serbia should develop
an ambitious integrated National energy and climate plan (NECP)
in a transparent and effective way, translating its commitment to
the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans into concrete action in-
cluding on introducing carbon-pricing instruments and phasing out
coal subsidies”. On the other hand, some harsher critics of the Euro-
peanization of former socialist states suggestthat, in many aspects,
the harmonization with the environmental and climate legislation is
a “Potemkin harmonization” meaning that changes exist mainly on
paper, while old practices remain intact (Ruso & Filipović, 2019; Bug-
aric, 2015; Crnčević & Orlović Lovren, 2017; Petrović, 2020).
Within the post-socialist bloc Serbia is everything but an exception in
terms of the development and the implementation of environmen-
tal and climate policies. Former socialist countries are still lagging
behind the level of environmental protection achieved in the older
member states, sometimes being criticized and referred to as “en-
fants terribles” of the EU climate policy.  Since large populations have
greater impacts on the climate than smaller ones, in total amounts,
the climate footprint of Serbia is rather low. However, per capita con-
tribution is significant. In comparative terms, the historical impact of
Serbia on climate change is assessed as medium, with a total of 2,74
billion tons of CO2 (Figures 1, 2, and 3).
It should be noted that over 80% of total GHG emissions in Serbia come
from the energy sector while EPS214 is responsible for 50% percent of
emissions.215 Although certain changes in individual consumption pat-
terns (e.g. reduction of electricity use within households and improve-
ments in energy efficiency) can contribute to lowering emissions, the
reliance on unrenewable energy sources of the large emitters and en-
ergy losses in the process of transmission (estimated at 15%) should be
taken as the most important factor contributing to the climate change
in Serbia. It is expected that by joining the European Union, Serbia will
be obliged to drastically reduce GHG emissions, and success in this
process will primarily depend on EPS’s readiness to invest in cleaner
forms of electricity production. The total value of these investments is
measured in billions of euros (Antić, 2020: 146, 154). The transition to
a low-carbon economy is expected to bring significant social, econom-
ic and environmental benefits to Serbia as a whole, but these benefits
and associated costs will not be evenly distributed throughout society,
creating winners and losers of decarbonization (Cavalheiro, 2020: 5).
One of the biggest challenges will be to make decision regarding the fu-
Figure 3. Cumulative CO2 emissions, 2019
Source: https://ourworldindata.org/contributed-most-global-co2 (accessed 8/10/2021)
Serbia
2.74 billion tones
2019
No data
0 t
50 million t
500 million t
5 billion t
50 billion t
100 billion t
250 billion t
>400 billion t
214 Public Enterprise Electric Power Industry of Serbia (JP Elektroprivreda Srbije)
215 The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic should also be taken into account. At the beginning, the Pandemic has led to a reduction in GHG emissions worldwide (in Serbia
as well), however emissions have returned to the same level and probably will increase as was the case after the Global Recession (2008-9) . Moreover, recent research
on urban mobility in Belgrade show that, while the overall reduction in urban mobility had a positive effect on the environment (reduction in the air pollution and
GHG emissions), changes in the structure of the means of transport have a potentially negative impact due to a significant decrease in the use of public transport, with
increasing use of private vehicles and more or less unchanged use of alternative (ecological) means of transport (Petrović, 2021).
210
C H A P T E R 9
National Human Development Report – Serbia 