flected in adapting to the everyday life context, espe-
cially when it comes to major life decision such as childbirth (Con-
ger et al., 2010). On the other hand, delaying in family planning as
a complex social phenomenon could be associated with the absence
of enough formally educated and trained resources to care for older
people, when younger are burdened with an additional financial and
emotional burden, but also with the time they have to dedicate to the
older people which lead to their decision to postpone the childbearing
(Rijken, 2009).
High mortality rates caused by a higher prevalence of risk factors for
chronic non-communicable diseases (NCDs), availability of health-
care services and other factors, directly contribute to a decrease in
population size. Also, the rising share of the older population (per-
sons aged 65 or over) contributes to the high mortality rate due to the
poor health of this population and associated diseases that can lead
to lethal outcomes. Wider health determinants that influence health,
such as socioeconomic status, lifestyle, health services,  should be
aimed at improving the health of the population and, consequently,
decrease the mortality rate. In order to prevent depopulation, we
need to seriously address and reduce the incidence of NCDs.
Given that the overall goal of public health is to prevent disease, pro-
mote health and improve the quality of life, in this chapter we will re-
view what can be done in the existing context in order to change the
current picture of the depopulation trend. This chapter will speak about
the basic characteristics of the health care system in Serbia, the main
causes of low fertility and high mortality rates, health indicators of the
elderly population, as well as the health consequences of the current
COVID-19 pandemic. The chapter ends with policy recommendations
on how to adjust public policies to the new demographic reality.
101  Infertility is defined as the inability to conceive after 12 months or more of regular unprotected intercourse.
102  Subfertility is a reduced reproductive capacity in a woman or man.
143
C H A P T E R 6
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
The health system of the Republic of Serbia is mostly centralized
with the Ministry of Health as the main decision maker, which close-
ly cooperates with the Republic Health Insurance Fund (RHIF) and
the Institute of Public Health of Serbia “Dr Milan Jovanovic Batut”
(IPH). The Republic Health Insurance Fund (RHIF) represents the
state agency for the fiscal distribution of funds collected through so-
cial security contributions.
Provision of health care services. In terms of accessibility, Serbia has
a comprehensive universal health system with free access to health
services at the primary level, but there are inequalities in the use of
health services, with the most vulnerable, uninsured and Roma hav-
ing more problems accessing health care. Financial constraints are
the main reason for unmet needs for health care, which are more
common among people with lower levels of education and among
the poorest sections of the population. In addition, a survey of cat-
astrophic direct payments among the population showed 2.3% of the
population was affected, with a higher incidence rate in rural areas,
numerous households, the poorest households, and those with a
chronic illness (WHO, 2019).
State-owned health facilities form a wide network at the primary, sec-
ondary and tertiary levels, and are overseen by the Ministry of Health.
The first level of contact with the health care system is realized in pri-
mary health care institutions that are established for the territory of
the city, i.e. one or more municipalities in accordance with the De-
cree on the Plan of the Health Institutions’ Network (2020). From this
level, users, i.e. patients are referred to higher levels, primarily to the
level of secondary health care - specialist-co