t to ...
Source: LFS, 2019, author’s calculations
Man
Pension insurance
Health insurance
Paid sick leave
Paid vacation
23
15-29
30-45
17
16
12
12
23
23
16
16
15
15
28
21
21
19
30
Woman
Man
Woman
Man
Woman
Man
Woman
35 Although it should be added that international companies are slowly introducing the concept of family friendly policies in the domestic context, which promotes a sup-
portive culture and balancing of family and professional life.
82
C H A P T E R 3
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
shifts do not leave parents enough time for family responsibilities, and
reduce their aspirations to have a subsequent child. Respondents list
fear of losing their jobs as an important reason for giving up childbear-
ing, which indicates the risks which parents (especially mothers) face if
they become pregnant and withdraw from work for some time, but also
that for a number of (potential) parents the work-parenting relation-
ship is an either-or relationship, rather than an and-also one. (Bjelobrk,
Sagati, 2018: 13; Tomanović, et al., 2016).
Companies, and especially the state administration, are quite conserv-
ative when it comes to organisation of work and do not offer sufficiently
diverse work arrangements which would help parents (Đukić-Dejano-
vić et al., 2018). Thus, only one in three (33.3%) employers offers the
possibility of redistribution of working hours, one in five (21.8%) the
possibility of sliding working hours, and one in ten (10%) work from
home in normal conditions.36 Most parents work in organisations
where there is no possibility to choose a work arrangement according
to their needs, and employers are not ready to significantly change
their practices in the future. Of all the sectors, the state administration
offers the least options to employees, which is a circumstance which
does not stimulate other employers, especially private companies, to
introduce new work arrangements (Đukić-Dejanović et al., 2018).
Bearing in mind that a significant number of workers prefer to work
in public companies and state administration due to job security and
a higher degree of guaranteed labour rights, it would be important for
working hours to be flexible enough to enable better harmonisation of
different spheres of life. In this way, the public sector would set new
standards and as such be a good practice example for other employers.
Most employees believe that having more options when choosing work
arrangements would help balance work and parenting. Sliding working
hours are preferred by more than half of employees (54%), slightly less
of them prefer redistribution of working hours (43%), and two in five
employees (40%) prefer work from home. The biggest gap between the
options offered for the organisation of working hours and the employ-
ees’ needs is in state administration (although the gap is also present
with other employers). The importance of this aspect of work is shown
by the fact that the level of income is not the only condition when choos-
ing or changing jobs because a large number of women (82%) and men
(77%) state that flexible working hours would be a key factor in job
change. This attitude is more pronounced with the increase in the edu-
cational level of employees, indicating that at a certain level the amount
of income, and even job security, are not enough for the workers’ satis-
faction and organisation of life (Đukić-Dejanović et al., 2018: 37-39).37
In order to avoid the employees’ absence due to maternity or paren-
tal leave, or to reduce the frequency of leaves due to a child’s illness or
family duties to which employees are entitled, some employers prefer
employing women who do not have children, those who do not plan to
give birth in the near future, or those whose children have already grown
up. Although these practices of discrimination are clearly sanctioned
under the Labour Law, the Law on Prevention of Harassment at Work
and the 