e more environmen-
tally friendly (so-called lifestyle migrations, already practiced in de-
veloped countries) (Benson & O’Riley, 2016)
It is clear that the already observed and projected changes due to
the altering climate will affect virtually all aspects of life in Serbia.
It will have significant effect on the overall health and quality of life
people, which will impact the health system, and almost all sectors of
the economy will experience some kind of challenges; people will be
pushed to migrate from areas particularly affected by climate change
(for example, due to loss of agricultural opportunities, economic de-
cline, frequent floods, landslides, droughts, fires, etc.). Having in this
in mind, it is obvious that future population policies will have to take
into account the effects of climate change and environmental distur-
bances that adversely affect all three components of depopulation:
fertility, mortality and migration. In this sense, the next chapter will
consider the relationship between the climate change and population
dynamics in Serbia.
Based on the case studies discussed so far, we have had the opportu-
nity to see that climate change is already adversely affecting the popu-
lation of Serbia, primarily through increased morbidity and mortality,
but also through forced migration. Unfortunately, studies examining
the impact of climate change and pollution on fertility have not been
conducted, while research examining the specific impact of climate
and environmental factors on migration is scarce. What we know
from the existing studies on migration in Serbia (see chapter on mi-
grations) is that, for now, economic reasons are the main incentive
214
C H A P T E R 9
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
for migration. However, the global trend of increasing ecological ref-
ugees and lifestyle migration indicate that in Serbia, too, an increase
in this form of spatial movement can be expected in the near future.
Of course, it should be borne in mind that climate and environmental
migration can be mediated by economic factors. As said, the decrease
of income from agriculture due to climate change can encourage a
number of people to leave rural areas in search of better living condi-
tions. On the other hand, environmental and climatic factors, such as
extreme weather events, can directly affect temporary or permanent
relocation, as was the case with Obrenovac residents after the 2014
floods. It is important to emphasize here that without very detailed
and focused research, it is impossible to separate the influences of
climatic and environmental factors from the influence of socio-eco-
nomic and political factors, and changes in (perception) of quality of
life on migration decisions. Similarly, without focused research, it is
not possible to determine the isolated impact of climate and environ-
mental factors on the other two components of the (de) population
– mortality and fertility, because they are mediated by a complex set
of socio-economic factors (e.g. lack of developed health care system
and the system of informing citizens about environmental risks and
prevention measures; lack of technological and infrastructural pre-
paredness of the state for extreme weather events, etc.), as we have
seen in the presented case studies.
In the next section, we shift our attention from the observed effects of
climate change to the projections of future climate effects on popula-
tion dynamics in Serbia.
Lifestyle migrations in Serbia
Lifestyle migrations of the upper-middle classes can be ex-
pected in Serbia in the future, but mostly in the form of “sec-
ondary homes” in environmentally attractive areas, in addi-
tion to primary homes located mostly in the urban centres.
One of the examples is Fruška Gora. The eastern part of
Fruška Gora, which is in the vicinity of the Belgrade – No-
vi-Sad highway, has always been an attractive location for
cottage ho