ctive
use of ICT for independent exploration and information selection are
all ingredients of a high quality, motivating education that develops
competencies and high learning outcomes.  In order to provide the
expected outcomes , the education system in Serbia needs to utilize
all of these ingredients.  Much of them are already developed but not
yet fully implemented, some call for further reform, but all require
a highly committed and quality oriented high level leadership in the
government.
4.6.3	 Making adult education and lifelong
learning a reality in Serbia
For optimizing the benefits of LLL, key failings need to be removed.
The difficulties of integrating the adult population, due to unfa-
miliarity with basic skills for lifelong learning and lack of access
to services, needs to be overcome. Increasing the attractiveness
of on-going programmes and improving the methods and organi-
zation of this training (cost, location, programmes, effectiveness)
would be paramount. More programmes should target older adults
and be provided, not only in person, but utilizing the possibilities of
distance learning, also. The gap between the skills that adult learn-
ers acquire through training and those required by employers needs
to be bridged, which can be accomplished only in cooperation be-
tween the two sectors.
Recognition of prior and informal learning is a long-standing goal
and appropriate mechanisms need to be put in place. During a pi-
lot self-assessment that involved more than 20 VET schools, exam
methodologies and instruments were designed based on the learn-
ing outcomes of qualification standards, but are still not part of the
system.96 This also requires making educational paths flexible and
facilitating movement through education and training, changing
qualifications, etc. The system of career guidance and counselling
should be accessible to adult learners and adapted to their needs,
within and outside of formal education.
Improving access to and the quality of lifelong learning, especial-
ly adult education (formal and non-formal), requires rethinking fi-
nancing schemes. Financial constraints are likely to be particularly
acute for low-income individuals. Funding mechanisms in which
adult learning expenses are co-funded by firms and adult learners,
or which allow individuals greater choice, can raise the efficiency
of service provision. Other options are tax deductions for compa-
nies organizing trainings. Individual learning and subsidies, such
as vouchers and allowances, can also be a good tool, as long as
schemes are appropriately targeted (OECD, 2005).
4.7  Further increase of coverage
of children in all preschool
education groups
The existing capacities of state-run and private preschool institutions
are insufficient to meet coverage requirements, so measures need to be
directed at improving capacities, as well as at the development of a net-
work of preschool facilities in order to enable easier access (“Kinder-
garten on the doorstep”), especially for children living in remote areas.
Preschool education needs to take into account the needs of children
from vulnerable groups.Further diversification of educational sup-
port and increasing investment in compensatory and social protec-
tion measures could help children from vulnerable families to enter
and stay in the education system.
4.7.1	 Full inclusion of vulnerable groups
Measures directed at full educational inclusion of all vulnerable
groups should be one of the priorities in Serbia, especially because, in
a situation of demographic decline, the groups traditionally excluded
can compensate for the loss of human capital. The birth rate among
the Roma population, and among the poorer population is higher
than that of the mainstream population, and cohorts of Roma and
poor children have a growth trend in parallel with the decrease of the
mainstream population cohorts.
Sector strategies (SROS), legislation (starting from the 2009
ground Law on the Foundations