his regard, the health and social status of the poor and Roma
is particularly devastating. For example, life expectancy for Roma
from unhygienic settlements is 12.4 years shorter than that of the
general population. In the new demographic circumstances that are
emerging before our eyes, when the population of Serbia is shrinking,
every inhabitant, regardless of the socio-economic status, ethnicity
or place of residence, represents a more valuable “resource”. In such
circumstances, inclusive education labour market and health care pol-
icies are becoming the most important population policy dimension.
Although much has been done to improve health outcomes, there is still room for improvement. High mortality and preventable disease
rates, difficult access to health services, high private health spending, poor environmental factors, low socioeconomic status and poor
health habits are major obstacles to improving health and prolonging a (healthy)  life expectancy.
28
I N T R O D U C T I O N
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
13	Conclusion: Development Policies for New
Population Dynamics
This Human Development Report develops the idea that, in light
of the inevitable demographic changes, public policies should be
aimed at strengthening the opportunities, potentials and freedoms
of all people, while demographic issues should be included in all rel-
evant public policies.
In this Human Development Report, we perceive population poli-
cies as multisectoral development policies. These are policies that
support human choices to give birth, be educated, lead a healthy
lifestyle, work, migrate or return, and policies that support integra-
tion, social cohesion and development tailored to the individual.
These are the policies of strengthening demographic quality, not
just quantity, policies to build strength and knowledge, in addition
to population size. Developmental population policies thus become
policies of human capital quality, that is, human resource develop-
ment policies. Such policies may possibly influence population size,
but they will certainly be human-centric and  value individual po-
tential per se as well as a contribution to society.
If the goals of population policy are defined in this way, then demo-
graphic changes must be addressed by various public policies, from
education, through tax policies, to environmental and urban devel-
opment policies, and institutions at different levels, especially local,
even when they have no direct competence in the domain of demo-
graphic policies. In order to contribute to balanced demographic
development and the use of all human potentials of a society, these
policies and institutions will need to become responsive to demo-
graphic issues. Mainstreaming demographic issues into sectoral
policies will be an expression of a society’s readiness to address
long-term demographic challenges.
Finally, this Human Development Report proposes us to address de-
mographic changes as a society, but not necessarily to set specific
quantitative targets. Because, even if we fail to stop the demograph-
ic decline through inclusive development policies, we will mitigate
the consequences of that fall and we will succeed in making our
society a better society to live in. We will make it more educated,
healthier, more satisfied and richer, and that is, in itself, a success.
C H A P T E R 1
Wolfgang Lutz and Nicholas Gailey
Depopulation As a Policy
Challenge in the Context of Global
Demographic Trends
30
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
1  Introduction: Population Decline from a
Historical Perspective
Human populations have survived cycles of growth and decline in
their numbers throughout history. Up until the late 1800s, changes in
death and migration rates were the main forces behind fluctuations in
population size all around the world, after which