a crucial tool for providing data, and rais-
ing human capacities in inspection and analytics departments should
be a developmental priority within the MESTD and other institutions.
Compliance of participants can be ensured by regaining trust in the
education services by providing quality and ensuring equity, and in-
criminating all practices that are by nature violations of integrity, but
seen as the grey area of informal practices. The education inspection
should be trained to recognize potential integrity risks within their ju-
risdiction but, also, pedagogical advisors need to work with schools
on recognizing, understanding and removing current malpractices or
integrity risks that have become part of everyday practice.
4.7.3 Recommendations to increase
school attractiveness
The education system and education institutions need to become
more responsive to the evolving needs of children, parents and com-
munities, in order to play a role in helping young parents decide to
stay in the country for the benefit and wellbeing of their children, and
to facilitate learning that leads to high-quality human resources. That
is currently not the case. In Serbia, schools are often places of anxiety,
fear of failure,100 rudeness, and, occasionally, peer violence (Popadić,
2009). Students often lack self-confidence, have low motivation, and
almost half of students hold a fixed growth mind-set - they do not be-
lieve that intelligence and competencies can be developed, and that
commitment and engagement are important for their own develop-
ment (OECD, 2021b).
The school ethos oriented towards student wellbeing and student
learning needs to be developed across the entire education system.
In addition to the relevant curriculum, challenging learning tasks,
authentic assessment and constructivist pedagogy, the school should
focus on supporting the social and emotional development and well-
being of its students. Active, meaningful student participation in all
matters that concern their learning and wellbeing, should become
the dominant practice, across all curricular areas. Positive, caring
and respectful student–peer, student–teacher, teacher–parent and
teacher–teacher relationships need to be fostered and maintained.
The social and emotional learning of teachers (and educators) should
be a must in order for teachers to knowledgeably manage social in-
teractions and support the social and emotional development of their
students. School leaders should play an active role in building a pos-
itive learning environment where the whole school community feels
included, connected, safe and respected, and where trust and part-
nership dominate. Schools such as those will not only ensure higher
learning outcomes but also provide a trustworthy basis for student
social development, and respond to the parents’ need for leaving
their children in a safe, stimulative and encouraging environment.
99 Although prescribed by law, this has not become widespread in practice. Good examples do exist though, such as the dropout prevention system piloted and promoted by the Centre
for Education.
100 PISA 2018 Database.
140
C H A P T E R 5
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
4.7.4 Increasing education attractiveness
and relevance
In order to be relevant, education should take into account the na-
tional context and the EU area of education and training, as Serbia
has committed to becoming a part thereof. In its Economic Reform
Programme for the period 2021-2023, Serbia has committed to devel-
oping digital skills, lifelong learning, and qualifications in line with
labour market needs, and to improving school-to-work transition
through work-based learning. In addition to the overall reform efforts
to be undertaken, the focus needs to be on digital education training
and apprenticeships - all in partnership between public and private
actors. Sector Skills Councils /SSC/ are the main instrument for iden