alisation of the Republic of
Serbia. Levels other than the provincial level are unable to take the
initiative in implementing the measures in the first step. The munici-
pal level, i.e. the level of local self-government units can only partially
implement it, and then only the largest local self-government units,
while for many small and underdeveloped municipalities with a lack
of highly qualified staff this is impossible. The district level, as men-
tioned earlier, is a number of state administration branches at the re-
gional level, and in the current system it does not have the capacity to
be a significant factor in the implementation of measures.
No.
Cluster
Cities
Priority measures
Special measures (M.06)
Two basic measures for all cities (clusters)
•	M.01: Strengthening district seats
•	M.02: Intersectoral development centres
1
Border towns
Vršac, Kikinda, Zaječar, Lozni-
ca, Pirot, Sombor
•	M.05: Permeable borders
•	M.08: Transverse connections
•	M.13: Zones of new urban functions
•	M.15: Housing nodes
Sombor:
Flagship projects
(the best preserved old town)
2
Mono-structural cities
Bor, Užice
•	M.07: City alliances and networks
•	M.10: Mega-business zones
•	M.11: Public transport
•	M.13: Zones of new urban functions
Bor:
Flagship projects
(Serbian mining centre)
3
Cities in shadow of bigger
cities
Zrenjanin, Pančevo,
Prokuplje, Smederevo, Srems-
ka Mitrovica
•	M.03: City thematisation
•	M.08: Transverse connections
•	M.09: Business associations
•	M.14: Functional renovation of city
centres
Smederevo: Flagship projects
(the largest medieval fortress in
the country, industrial heritage)
Sremska Mitrovica: Flagship
projects (the most valuable ancient
heritage in Serbia)
4
Axial cities207
Valjevo, Vranje, Jagodina,
Kraljevo, Kruševac, Leskovac,
Požarevac, Subotica, Čačak,
Šabac
•	M.03: City thematisation
• M.10: Mega-business zones
•	M.12: Business-creative incubators
•	M.15:  Housing nodes
Kruševac:
Flagship projects
(old capital of Serbia)
5
Cities with intensive growth
Novi Pazar
•	M.04: Construction of high-speed roads
•	M.09: Business associations
•	M.10: Mega-business zones
•	M.12: Business-creative incubators
Novi Pazar:
Flagship projects
(extremely valuable medieval and
Ottoman heritage)
Table 8. Clusters of medium-sized cities with priority measures
207 It refers to the cities that are already located along the main development axes of the country – the main transportation corridors.
197
C H A P T E R 8
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
However, the district level with medium-sized cities as their centres
is precisely the level at which the greatest contribution can be made
to balancing the spatial development of Serbia. Today, the district
level is mostly related to several small bodies of regional importance,
such as regional offices and agencies for economic or rural develop-
ment. In this part, through the implementation of M.01 and M.02
measures, the goal is to achieve both qualitative and quantitative bal-
ance. Through the creation of intersectoral development centres, a
model of integration of all sectors crucial for development into one
institution is proposed for the purpose of harmonised action and de-
velopment. This creates a framework for the employment of a larger
number of highly educated professionals of various profiles at the
level of medium-sized cities, which strengthens the staff base nec-
essary for the current post-industrial development. Third, integrated
approach and significant staff capacity indirectly enable encouraging
innovation, digitalisation and creativity, as well as the creation and
management of more complex projects. A large number of munici-
palities in Serbia cannot achieve this on their own, and support from
the national and provincial levels is usually insufficient. Fourth, a
base of key future consumers of important post-industrial economy
development sectors is being created, such as services, trade, e