eave for child care (lasting up to 365 days), is only
available to employed parents, i.e. those who have formally recorded
income from work so that the compensation is a salary compensation.
The first part of the leave is used by the woman (and only in certain
cases by the father), while in the second part of the leave both parents
have an equal right. Compensation for the period during maternity
leave is the full amount of salary if the mother has worked continuously
for 18 months. If the mother has had an intermittent length of service
or any form of employment, the amount to be received is obtained
by summing all income in the previous 18 months divided by 18, with
the lowest allowance a woman can receive being the minimum wage.
During the leave for child care, the salary compensation is calculated ac-
cording to the same principle, with no lower limit of compensation, so
the monthly compensation can amount to only a few hundred dinars.42
Given the volatile labour market, a significant number of women fail to
link 18 months of service and thus earn 100% of their wages, leaving
them without sufficient income during their absence.
Serbia is one of the countries with relatively long parental leave, exclu-
sive right of use and rather inflexible options for its use (OECD, 2021).43
Observed through the equivalent of full employment compensation
before leave, only a few, mostly post-socialist countries, have a total
leave of one year (OECD, 2021). The key reason for the longer absence
is the insufficiently developed infrastructure of nurseries, which would
enable a relatively quick return of women to work.
Such a long period for calculation affects the postponement of child-
bearing, i.e. the spouses wait for the woman to have enough service
time to enable her to have full or optimal compensation of salary, be-
fore deciding to become parents.
The inflexibility of using this measure is reflected in the fact that the
leave can be used as one-off only and without the possibility of division
into several “instalments”. In case the parent has to return to work, the
remaining part of the leave cannot be used later. The law does not pro-
vide options for extending leave with proportionally reduced compen-
sation. Also, the regulations are not sensitive enough for parents who
have twins, since the same number of days is available to them regard-
less of the number of children born at the same time.
Since 2001, the Labour Law has been offering men the opportuni-
ty to equally use the child care leave and additional seven days after
the birth of a child, but in no way obliges them to do so, nor is there a
special number of days of leave reserved for fathers. Although the Law
gives men the right to use parental leave, this measure has never been
promoted, nor is it high on the list of priorities of practical policies.
There are three reasons why it is important for men to exercise their
right to this leave and spend at least a few weeks with their children
as primary parents. The first reason is that initial contact and taking
responsibility are important for the father’s connection with the child
and his continuous involvement in the later stages of growing up. The
second reason is related to gender relations in the labour market. With-
drawal of men from the sphere of work for a while has an impact on the
reduction of the gender asymmetry in the labour market and enables
women to catch up with their male colleagues in their career paths.
Bearing in mind that women withdraw from the labour market for a
while due to childbirth, and that the absence in Serbia is relatively long,
this exclusion puts them in an unequal position in career advancement
or keeping a job. The third reason is changing the perception of gender
roles in the sphere of work. Accepting that fathers can, and should be
absent from work when necessary due to family obligations, not just
42 The upper limit is set, relatively high, at 5 average wages, which raises the questi