es, paired with
high out-migration often seen in lower-middle income countries. This
combination has made Serbia one of the fastest depopulating coun-
tries in the world. In earlier times, such as during World War I, Serbia
suffered immense casualties – by many estimates Serbs had the high-
est proportional losses of the war with about 16% of the population
or 1.25M dead (Keegan, 1998; Radivojevic and Penev, 2014). The his-
torical depopulation was different from today not only because it was
the result of conflict, but also because at the time the Serb population
could at least “rebound” in some sense given the country’s high fer-
tility rates. By contrast, Serbia had only 1.49 children per woman in
2018. If Serbia’s 21st century depopulation trend is to be moderated,
then it will be critical to guarantee practical and reliable policy support
for families as well as reduce the deeply felt economic and cultural
push-factors contributing to high rates of out-migration.
Definitive statistics on out-migration, and by extension net migration,
are difficult to come by for the whole of the Balkan region. A recent
investigation into the data (which labeled the task a “statistical night-
mare,”) found that approximately 60,000 people leave Serbia each
year, with about 15,000 to 20,000 more leaving each year than re-
turning (Judah, 2019). The OECD estimates that more than 650,000
people, mostly young, have left Serbia in the last two decades (OECD
2020). While the scale of movement varies, observers and interna-
tional organisations widely look to the future with expectations of
continued high out-migration in Serbia. Below, Figure 4 details pop-
ulation projections for the “medium assumption” scenario, in which
current trends largely continue. As outlined in earlier sections, Serbia
can expect a smaller, better educated population in the future.
Serbia’s combination of an educated population and the country’s
close proximity to European economies wanting their labour make
it difficult for the country to build up human capital. As measured
by the World Economic Forum,7 the ability of Serbia to retain its tal-
ent or prevent “brain drain” currently ranks among the worst of all
countries, within and outside the region, placing Serbia 134 out of 137
countries included in the assessment. Peers in the region, like Croa-
tia, Romania, and Bulgaria, fare similarly poorly as they continue to
struggle with the same westward migration outflows, which in some
cases have accelerated as a natural result of being integrated into the
European single market while also being at clearly different levels of
economic strength.. Many Eastern European countries have seen a
spike in out-migration after their accession to the European Union,
and out-migration remains higher in newly acceded countries than
their levels before joining, but it is unclear at what new levels they
might eventually stabilise.
5  Serbia Amid High Out-Migration
7 	For more information, see The World Economic Forum, “Executive Opinion Survey, Appendix C,” available at
http://reports.weforum.org/global-competitiveness-index-2017-2018/competitiveness-rankings/#series=EOSQ399.
42
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
These experiences give a sobering reason to put out-migration
among the highest of priorities in discussions about EU membership
and national planning efforts, as this type of out-migration acceler-
ation would likely repeat itself in Serbia if Serbia gets closer to (and
eventually attains) EU membership status. Surveys indicated that in
the minds of Serbs, EU membership is now closely associated with
the facilitation of individuals to move away (Regional Cooperation
Council, 2018). The consequential nature of this issue calls on Ser-
bian leadership to proactively reduce migration push-factor pres-
sures before accession, yet still, most of the out-migration dynamics
would inevitably be set by