an depopulation
The ‘financial element’ of urban shrinking is an under-researched
aspect within the topic of urban decline. Two questions are impor-
tant here: (1) how to measure urban decline in this regard and (2) how
to shape financial measures based on that? In the first case, there is
no consensus among experts and a number of indicators have been
proposed: the local revenue trends, the city’s gross domestic product
trends, the number of employees, i.e. unemployed relative to the to-
tal population, level of investment, difference between revenues and
expenses or the degree of dependence of the local budget on exter-
nal financial sources, such as regional or state administration (Wolff,
2010; Stryjakiewicz & Jaroszewska, 2016).
In the case of financial measures for shrinking cities, it should be said
immediately that they are rarely applied separately, but are combined
ing, while in the category of the smallest ones (below 40,000 inhab-
itants), all cities are in decline. Similarly, Novi Pazar, which is growing
the fastest, is in the first category of cities, while Bor, with the largest
decline, is in the last. The biggest exceptions to the above rule can be
singled out. In a negative sense, it is Subotica, because it is declin-
ing, and it is the largest among the researched cities. However, unlike
most cities, Subotica has a distinct border-city character, so despite
its size, it has a relatively small gravitation zone. On the other hand,
there are the positive examples of Jagodina and Požarevac, cities in
the fifth category, which have a growth of over 5%. Both cities are in
the central part of the country and around several cities which are
larger or comparable to them (Smederevo, Ćuprija and Paraćin), so a
good networking influence can be assumed.
with spatial measures in the broader development policy of a city. In
cities with a extreme shrinkage in the United States, tax incentives
and pressures are applied in order to move the population from parts
of the city with larger shrinkage to other parts. In Western Europe,
this approach has been changed in line with the less liberal model of
urban development. For example, in cities with a large and long-last-
ing shrinkage in the former East Germany,181 financial support and in-
vestments are systematically directed to city quarters where a higher
concentration of users (tenants, employees, etc.) is still maintained.
The goal is to transform the renovated neighbourhoods into ‘mag-
nets’ for further reurbanisation. This approach is known as an ‘urban
archipelago’ (Cepl, 2006) or ‘patchwork urbanism’ (Brent, 2012).
The analysis in this part is made at the local self-government unit
level, because only such data are officially available. The following
available indicators were selected for analysis: average salary, budget
revenues and investments.182 In a financial sense, this in a certain way
looks at the present (salaries), the recent past (revenues) and the near
No.
City size
Large growth
(>10%)
Moderate growth
(5–10%)
Small growth
(0–5%)
Small decline
(0–5%)
Moderate decline
(5–10%)
Large decline
(>10%)
1
>80 thousand inhabitants
Novi Pazar
Kraljevo
Čačak
Subotica
Pančevo
-
-
2
70–80 thousand inhabitants
-
-
Smederevo
Kruševac
Zrenjanin Šabac
-
-
3
60–70 thousand inhabitants
-
-
-
Leskovac
Valjevo
Užice
-
-
4
50–60 thousand inhabitants
-
-
Vranje
Sremska
Mitrovica
-
-
5
40–50 thousand inhabitants
-
Jagodina
Požarevac
-
Pirot
Sombor
Loznica
-
6
<40 thousand inhabitants
-
-
-
Zaječar
Vršac
Prokuplje
Kikinda
Bor
Table 4. Population in the city and urban depopulation for the 2002/2011 period
181 Many cities of the former East Germany began to shrink as early as at the end of World War II, but this process was markedly accelerated by the fall of socialism and the
uncertainty of the post-socialist transition.
182 The last two indicators were adjusted per capita for comparison. Data such as the share of employed and unemployed have proven to be very problematic for Serbia du