ally addressed this
question by asking what the “optimal” fertility level is, according to
different sets of criteria (Striessnig and Lutz, 2013). If the goal is for
a country to outnumber its neighbours then the “optimum” level of
fertility is tied to the competing group. And if the neighbours have
the same goal, then the search for an optimum fertility level can be-
come an unsustainable arms race. If, on the other extreme, the goal
is to minimise the human footprint on this planet without attaching
special value to human life – as is suggested by proponents of strong
sustainability measures – then the “optimum” fertility might be as
low as zero.
Figure 7. Fertility Trends in Russia
Source: VID and IIASA, 2020.
1.0
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Fertility Rate
Mean age at ﬁrst birth (right y axis)
Tempo and paritz adjusted TFRp*
TFR
48
C H A P T E R 1
National Human Development Report – Serbia 2022  •  Human Development in Response to Demographic Change
If indicators of human well-being and the cost of population ageing
are taken as criteria, and if the population is stratified by education
groups to account for differential productively, then there is a rather
broad long-term “optimum” TFR range, from 1.5-1.8 (Striessnig and
Lutz, 2013). From this perspective, the optimum TFR may be below
2.0 because with fewer children, more can be invested in each child,
thus enhancing productivity. But below 1.5 the cost of ageing and as-
sociated pensions would offset this benefit in this economic weighing
of costs and benefits, and there are surely tipping points along the
way between 1.5 and 2.0 where economies of scale are lost and the
broader economy becomes less productive. If other considerations
like natural resource degradation or climate change are added to the
equation then the “optimum” would be arguably lower, depending on
the local conditions and the weight that longer-term environmental
concerns are given in relation to shorter-term economic concerns.
Still, unless we become immortal or migration inflows for a given
country become never-ending, at some point (at least over several
centuries) any population that does not reproduce itself eventually
disappears. In the timeframe of policy-making and the plannable,
what should be considered as an optimal level of fertility is a matter
of values, judgement, and priorities – whether that means below, at,
or above a replacement level TFR of 2.1.
7  Economic and Geopolitical Consequences of
Population Decline
In the economic literature a lot has been written about the econom-
ic consequences of population ageing, but much less so on popula-
tion decline and depopulation associated with strong out-migration
(possibly because it has not yet affected the countries in which the
leading economists are based). But it is reasonable to assume that the
economic effects of declines in population size go beyond those asso-
ciated with population ageing, through lesser economies of scale in
terms of market size or certain sectors of the economy that are closely
linked to an increasing population, such as the construction industry.
Since economists often tend to think in terms of equilibria, their first
approach would be to view population decline as just a transitory phe-
nomenon up until a new stationary population is reached. However,
the process of shrinking may lead (a) to significant societal adjust-
ment costs during the transition from larger to smaller population
numbers, (b) a change in the distribution of the population as well as
a change in the distribution of outcomes (wellbeing) across sub-pop-
ulations, and (c) possibly different long-term outcomes in terms of
economic performance and wellbeing depending on how the process
is shaped by policy-making (e.g. the extent to which the shrinking of
the labour force can be counteracted by investments in education or
other positive productivity gains).
In trying to add